# 2025-07-06: creatine purchase

## Background

Creatine supplementation had been on my mind for a while, since at
least late 2024 (and sort-of before then). It was included in my list
of [things to investigate](../../notes/things-to-investigate.md). It
was interesting to me as a way to help with muscle strength, an area
that I have been prioritizing.

However, I had deprioritized it in late 2024 as I wanted to focus on
other amino acids first (lysine and n-acetylcysteine) and also first
try to build strength as much as possible by means of regular
exercise.

In early 2025, I decided to hold off on starting a new supplement
shortly before my India travel. My plan was to look into starting
creatine after returning from India.

I added creatine to my Amazon cart some time when in India, with the
intention of getting it whenever I next checkout.

## Actual purchase on 2025-07-06 and pickup on 2025-07-18

On Sunday 2025-07-06, my shopping cart reached a critical size that
justified making the purchase, so I went ahead and placed the
order. The brand of creatine I purchased was
[this](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0BZGDKLFN?ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_fed_asin_title&th=1).

I ended up delaying my pickup of the order, partly because I placed an
additional order a week later and decided to wait for both to be
ready. I finally picked up both orders on Friday 2025-07-18.

## Consumption plan

The recommended daily dose is 3 gummies. Each gummy is 1 gram, so
that's a total of 3 grams, compared to a general safe maintenance dose
of 3 to 5 grams. However, I don't want to suddenly go up to that dose,
so my plan is to start more gradually at a dose of 1 gummy, carefully
monitoring for symptoms of GI distress.

My plan is to escalate gradually with the intent of deferring the dose
escalation if I encounter symptoms of GI distress. If the GI distress
feels directly related to the creatine, then I should pause the
creatine consumption. If I think there's another cause for the GI
distress, I should continue creatine but push back the dose
escalation.

Here is the if-all-goes-well schedule starting Saturday 2025-07-19:

* First 2 weeks: 1 gummy per day, with my morning meal

* Next 2 weeks: 2 gummies per day, with my morning meal

* After that: 3 gummies per day, with my morning meal

## Update 2025-08-09

After some delay relative to the original plan, I have increased my
consumption to 2 gummies per day. I am not sure if I will stay at 2 or
go back down to 1 gummy per day. I'm thinking of having it be
responsive to my overall dietary protein intake. During summer months,
when my food consumption is a bit lower so my dietary protein also
falls, I may do more gummies (2 or 3) whereas in the winter months
when my dietary protein is high, I may do fewer gummies (1 or 2). I'm
also experimenting with similar fluctuation in the quantity of lysine
I consume based on season.

## Update 2025-08-14

As of around 2025-08-11 or 2025-08-12 I went back down to 1 gummy per
day based on a suspicion that 2 gummies per day were not serving me
well.

On 2025-08-14 I skipped creatine entirely with the intention of
returning to it after a bit of a reset from the increased consumption
a few days ago.
