# 2025 activity tracker

## 2025-01-02

On Thursday 2025-01-02, I made a trip for administrative tasks,
including a stop at the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC Berkeley for package
pickup.

## 2025-01-07

On Tuesday 2025-01-07, in the evening, I made a multi-stop trip in
downtown Berkeley. I dropped off two used, worn-and-torn sweatshirts
at Goodwill. I then went to Citibank to get quarters for
laundry. Finally, I went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-01-15

On Wednesday 2025-01-15, in the evening, I went for my audiological
evaluation appointment with Berkeley Hearing Center; details
[here](2025-01-15-audiological-evaluation.md). On the way back, I
stopped at Berkeley Bowl for food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-01-22

On Wednesday 2025-01-22, in the morning (and going a little past noon)
I went to the LabCorp location at 3100 San Pablo Ave for a blood
draw. See
[2025-01-22-blood-tests.md](2025-01-22-blood-tests.md#day-of-the-blood-draw-2025-01-22)
for more information.

## 2025-01-23

On Thursday 2025-01-23, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley. My first
stop was at Citibank, where I did a few financial transactions,
including withdrawing quarters for laundry. I then went to Trader
Joe's for food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-01-26

In addition to my food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql), I also stopped at a few
ATMs: I stopped at the Allpoint ATM in the Walgreens on Adeline Street
before my Berkeley Bowl trip, and I stopped at the Chase and Wells
Fargo ATMs on Shattuck Avenue (near Center Street) on the way to
Trader Joe's.

## 2025-02-01

In the evening, I made a trip to Trader Joe's for grocery shopping;
the purchases are recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql). As it was raining lightly,
and I didn't want my purchased food to get too wet on the way back, I
decided to take BART back (from downtown Berkeley BART to Ashby BART)
instead of walking back (which is what makes the trip worthy of
recording in the activity tracker).

## 2025-02-21

On Friday 2025-02-21, in the evening, I made a long-overdue trip to
the Walgreens at Adeline Street to stock up on toiletries. I completed
checkout at 5:42 PM.

## 2025-02-22

On Saturday 2025-02-22, I briefly stopped at Walgreens in the late
afternoon to use the Allpoint ATM there and then checked whether the
Seventh Generation dish soap was in stock. It wasn't, so I went to
Berkeley Bowl and purchased some food as well as Seventh Generation
dish soap. The purchases are recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-02-23

On Sunday 2025-02-23, in the late afternoon / early evening, I made
two trips to Sports Basement. In the first trip, I purchased a 20 lb
dumb bell and a 12 lb kettle bell. 20 lb was the only dumb bell size
above 10 lb, and I expect that it will be a good challenge weight for
biceps curls (it is too heavy for the more intense exercises I do with
weights up to 10 lb).

The 12 lb kettle bell felt like the right level of heavy for kettle
bell exercises (that I have not done previously). I also tried the 4
lb (it was too light and also its hole was too small for my use) and
30 lb and 35 lb (these were too heavy for the kinds of exercises I
plan to do, at least with my current strength level).

At time of checkout, I also purchased the lifetime membership for $25.

After dropping both weights at home, I made a second trip to purchase
a second 20 lb dumb bell.

In total, I saved $11 in discounts thanks to the lifetime membership
(this is before taxes, but so is the lifetime membership cost of $25).

## 2025-02-26

In the late afternoon / early evening, I made a trip to Walgreens to
stock up on toiletries. After I got back home and stowed away the
purchased stuff, I immediately headed out again for a trip to Whole
Foods. The food purchases made at Whole Foods are recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-02-28

In the evening, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC
Berkeley for package pickup.

## 2025-03-21

In the afternoon, I made a trip to Walgreens for a COVID vaccine
booster dose. See
[here](2025-03-21-pfizer-covid-vaccine-updated-booster-dose.md) for
details. On the way back, I stopped at Berkeley Bowl for food
purchases recorded [here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-03-26

In the evening, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley. My first stop was
at Citibank to withdraw quarters for laundry.  I then went to Trader
Joe's for food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-04-04

In the evening, I made a trip to Walgreens for toiletries purchases.

## 2025-04-06

On Sunday 2025-04-06, in the afternoon, I made a trip for some
administrative stuff including pickup of packages from Amazon Hub
Locker.

## 2025-04-15

On Tuesday 2025-04-15, in the afternoon, I made a trip to downtown
Berkeley. I first dropped off a couple of old suitcases at
Goodwill. After that, I went to Trader Joe's for food purchases
recorded [here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-04-16

On Wednesday 2025-04-16, I went to Total Health Dental Care for a
regular dental cleaning. The visit is recorded
here](2025-04-16-dental-cleaning.md). After that, I went to the Amazon
Hub Locker at ASUC Berkeley for a package pickup and then stopped by
at Walgreens to purchase a few items.

## 2025-04-18

On Friday 2025-04-18, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley for some
administrative stuff. After being done with the administrative stuff,
I went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded
[here](../../sql/food_purchases_2025.sql).

## 2025-05-09

I made outside trips in the morning and afternoon.

## 2025-05-12

I made an outside trip in the morning, returning shortly after noon.
