# 2025-07-22: right index finger cut after repeated tweezers use

## Incident

On Tuesday 2025-07-22, around 4:30 PM, I repeatedly used 10-inch
tweezers (from [this
set](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08PV6F4MR?ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_fed_asin_title))
for a house cleaning task (removing lint that was stuck in the dryer
lint screen area but not on the screen itself. I did this for about 5
to 10 minutes. As part of this process, I also removed the thing
holding the 12-inch tweezers, though I didn't end up using the 12-inch
tweezers. As I was wrapping up, I noticed that my right index finger
had a cut right around the point where I would have applied pressure
on the tweezers with it.

The blood washed out when I washed my hands with soap and water, but
reappeared within a minute, suggesting that the wound had not clotted
yet. In order to speed up the clotting process (and associated
healing) and also avoid the messiness coming from the bleeding finger,
I wrapped it in a water block flex bandage. The first bandage that I
attempted did not wrap properly, likely because of poor planning by me
around the angle (as the cut was slanted, I wrapped the bandage in a
way that aligned with it, but ended up with the two ends not meeting,
making the flex wrapping not work). I had more success with the second
bandage that I tried.

## Best practices going forward

### Precautions at each tweezer use

I don't expect to need to use these tweezers often. Some of the
alternatives I might try in the future are:

* I can wear a glove on the hand using the tweezer. I don't know how
  well the glove shields from the sharpness of the tweezer.

* I can use a paper towel for intermediation, reducing the sharp
  pressure in a specific area.

* I can try to use multiple fingers for gripping (this can be combined
  with using the paper towel to spread the force). This will reduce
  the per-finger force needed, though it does increase the risk
  surface area. I can also switch around the relative pressure between
  the fingers over time so that no particular finger gets too
  stressed.

### Regular monitoring and pausing as soon as I notice issues

It would also be good practice to check the condition of my finger
after every few uses (let's say after a minute of use) and pause if I
see issues. I could go back, rest my fingers, apply vaseline, and
continue another day or at least after a few hours.

### Not doing this during times with a low risk tolerance

I should consider the use of such tweezers as risk-prone, so I should
avoid doing this at times with a low risk tolerance, such as right
before travel or right before an appointment.

### Vaseline application shortly prior

I've generally been regular with vaseline application; however, I did
not specifically apply vaseline in the run-up to the tweezer use, so
the last application was a few hours prior. Since this cut appears to
be purely a skin-level cut rather than something deeper, I suspect
that recent vaseline application may have helped.
