# 2025-03-21: Pfizer COVID vaccine updated booster dose

Sections of this document:

* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)

## Appointment booking

I booked my appointment for the COVID vaccine (indicating a preference
for Pfizer) on Saturday March 1. The appointment is for Friday March
21 at 3 PM at the 2801 Adeline Street location.

I followed the [best practices around vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.md)
for the process. In particular, this included checking my calendar and
on-call schedule around the time, picking the recommended day of week
and time of day, and checking for other events in the two weeks before
and after. I also blocked off time on my calendar for the vaccine
appointment and did the other setup (including on-call changes and
calendar reminders) based on guidance in the best practices doc.

### Consent form

After booking the vaccine, I filled the consent form. The questions were as follows:

* Do you have a history of allergic reactions or allergies to latex,
  medications, food, or vaccines (e.g., polyethylene glycol,
  polysorbate, eggs, bovine protein, gelatin, gentamicin, polymyxin,
  neomycin, phenol, yeast, or thimerosal)?

  Answer: No

* Have you ever had a reaction after receiving a vaccination,
  including fainting or feeling dizzy?

  Answer: No

* Have you ever had a seizure disorder for which you are on seizure
  medication(s), a brain disorder, Guillain-Barr√© syndrome (a
  condition that causes paralysis) or other nervous system problem?

  Answer: No

* Have you received any vaccinations or skin tests in the past eight weeks?

  Answer: No

* Check any vaccinations you've received in the past. Include a best estimate for the month(MM) and year(YYYY) of each vaccination.

  Pneumonia: did not check

  Shingles: did not check

  Whooping cough: checked, and entered 07/2024 for the [Tdap vaccine
  booster
  dose](../2024/2024-07-12-tdap-vaccine-booster-dose.md).

* Do you have any chronic health condition(s) such as cancer, chronic
  kidney disease, immunocompromised, chronic lung disease, obesity,
  sickle cell disease, diabetes, asthma or heart disease?

  Answer: No

* Have you been treated with antibody therapy (monoclonal antibodies
  or convalescent plasma) specifically for COVID-19?

  Answer: No

## Preparation

### Strength exercises and hand gripper exercise paused on 2025-03-19

On Wednesday 2025-03-19, I paused strength exercises and hand gripper
exercise. This was consistent with the calendar reminder I had put in
place.

### Weather check on the evening of 2025-03-19

On the evening of Wednesday 2025-03-19, I checked the weather and
confirmed that the time of the vaccine administration is forecast to
not have rain and to be reasonably warm (temperature range of 61-62
degrees Fahrenheit).

### Shopping and laundry done on 2025-03-19 and 2025-03-20

I did shopping at Berkeley Bowl on 2025-03-19 and at Trader Joe's on
2025-03-20. I did regular laundry on 2025-03-19 and heavy laundry on
2025-03-20, so my shopping and laundry needs in the days right after
the vaccine are minimal.

### Packing / prep on the morning of 2025-03-21

While packing / prep is ideally done the previous evening, the
previous evening was hectic with laundry completion, so I deferred
packing / prep to the morning. This included packing the COVID-19
vaccine card as well as looking into my California digital vaccine
record situation.

## Appointment

### Arrival and attempt to do self-check-in

I arrived at the self-check-in area at 2:38 PM (compared to
appointment time of 3 PM and reporting time of 2:45 PM), took a photo
of the QR code, and started the check-in. After the check-in, I was
asked to fill in a health status, which I did and then submitted, but
it then got stuck in a loading state. I waited till about 2:42 PM,
then tried again and ran into the same issue.

### Interaction with counter

At around 2:46 PM, I was called to the counter. While my check-in had
been received, my online form had not gotten through, so I was asked
to answer the questions again. I gave the month and year of recent
vaccinations (flu, Tdap, and COVID-19).

For insurance, I was asked if my insurance information remained the
same. I mentioned that I had [switched from PPO to HMO starting
2025](2025-switch-from-ppo-to-hmo.md) so one of the letters in my
insurance ID had changed. I gave a paper printout of my electronic
insurance card. The person at the counter said that the insurance
process only cares about the numeric part of the insurance ID, and
also confirmed that none of the information relevant for the
Walgreens/Blue Shield connection.

The person at the counter also did a quick run to confirm that the
Pfizer COVID vaccine was in stock.

At around 2:52 PM, I was given a printout of the filled form. I asked
if I should step aside to review and sign it. But the person at the
counter suggested I stay there so it could be finished while she still
had my transaction open in the system. So I reviewed, signed, and
dated the form and returned it. I was then given an information sheet
and asked to wait on the side while the pharmacist enters the
information, with the understanding that after that happens, they'll
"ring me up" even though I won't actually have to pay or even insert a
payment card.

### Checkout

I was finally called at around 3:10 PM for checkout. I entered the
phone number for identification and then also entered my phone number
again to get Walgreens Rewards. Unlike past practice, I was not given
the folded pamphlet with the details of the exact vaccine (that also
serves as receipt) and instead told that I'll get it along with the
actual vaccine injection. I left at 3:12 PM and moved to the waiting
area for the vaccine room.

### Waiting for vaccine administration

I took out my COVID-19 vaccine record card. I walked around for a
little bit, but got a bit tired and stressed in my left shoulder, so
at around 3:25 PM I decided to sit down with the backpack on the
floor.

### Vaccine administration

At 3:30 PM I was called inside. For identification I was asked to
confirm my date of birth. I gave the pharmacist my vaccine record
card, told her I want the vaccine in my right arm, then removed my
sweatshirt and sat down. She filled in the vaccine details in the
vaccine record card and gave it back to me. I pulled and held my shirt
sleeve up. She administered the vaccine dose and then put a bandage on
top of it. She also handed me the pamphlet that also serves as my
receipt. This specified the medication as Comirnaty and the dose as
0.3ml.

She told me to wait for 15 minutes in the store. She then
left the vaccine room.

I put my sweatshirt back on, put the vaccine record card and pamphlet
in my backpack, confirmed I have all my belongings, and exited the
vaccine room at around 3:32 PM.

### Waiting after vaccine administration

I waited in front of the vaccine room, mostly seated, till around 3:46
PM; for the last few minutes I caught up with messages on my phone. At
3:46 PM I got up and left.

### Return journey

I stopped at the Berkeley Bowl opposite the Walgreens to buy some
stuff, finishing checkout there at 3:59 PM. I then headed back home.
