# 2025-10-22: dental cleaning

I had a dental cleaning appointment on Wednesday 2025-10-22 at Total
Health Dental Care at 3017 Telegraph Avenue for a regular dental
cleaning at 1 PM. The previous dental cleaning had been on
[2025-04-16](2025-04-16-dental-cleaning.md).

NOTE: The dental cleaning appointment is over and the main thing
flagged is that I have a bit more gum inflammation than usual. I need
to document details of the cleaning itself and of my further thinking
around the potential causes for this flagging and the changes that I
will or won't make in response. However, the process of writing these
notes may take some time. As of now, I have private notes that I hope
to flesh out later.

Sections of this document:

* [Prior preparation](#prior-preparation)

## Prior preparation

### Appointment set on 2025-04-16 at end of previous dental cleaning

My appointment was set onf Wednesday 2025-04-16 at the end of the
[previous dental cleaning](2025-04-16-dental-cleaning.md).

### Creation of calendar event, reminders etc. on 2025-04-17

On Thursday 2025-04-17, I created the calendar event and reminders and
also created the doc for this dental cleaning appointment.

### Review of schedules / overrides and maintenance windows on 2025-10-09

On Thursday 2025-10-09, one day after the originally scheduled date of
Wednesday 2025-10-08, I reviewed the schedules and maintenance
windows. The maintenance window I had already created was sufficient,
and per the on-call schedule I was already not on-call for either the
infrastructure service or the customer service, so I didn't need to
take further action.

### Acknowledgement of guidance to limit outside foods and phase out cayenne pepper on 2025-10-09

On Thursday 2025-10-09, I reviewed and acknowledged the guidance to
limit outside foods and phase out cayenne pepper. My plan is as
follows:

* For cayenne pepper, I plan to maintain the existing low quantity for
  the immediate next eggplant meal prep and then go to half the
  quantity for the next potatoes prep, and then not use cayenne pepper
  at all for subsequent preps until after the dental cleaning.

  UPDATE 2025-10-21: I ended up using a small amount of cayenne pepper
  with the eggplant meal prep on 2025-10-13 and skipping it entirely
  with the potatoes prep of 2025-10-15 and the eggplant meal prep of
  2025-10-19. See the comments at the start of the respective meal
  prep blocks in
  [food_preparations_and_openings_2025.sql](../../sql/food_preparations_and_openings_2025.sql)
  for more information.

* I don't plan to eat out until the dental cleaning. I also plan to
  pause consumption of the red chutney from the previous eating out
  until a week after the dental cleaning.

Overall, this time around, I have not had sore throat issues of the
sort I have had in the month or two leading up to the dental cleaning,
so I can be a bit more adventurous, while still maintaining a healthy
amount of caution.

### Appointment confirmation on 2025-10-12

On Sunday 2025-10-12, I responded affirmatively to an automated email
message asking me to confirm the appointment.

### Acknowledgement of guidance to probe and be more careful on 2025-10-13

On Monday 2025-10-13, I acknowledged the guidance (that I was reminded
of by the calendar reminder) to probe and be more careful leading up
to the dental cleaning. The idea was to identify mouth bites and mouth
ulcers to avoid aggravating them unnecessarily ahead of the dental
cleaning, as the sharp instruments used in the dental cleaning had the
potential to further aggravate them.

Fortunately, there were no biting incidents or mouth ulcers in the
period from 2025-10-13 to the dental cleaning. Overall, per my private
notes, I have had only one biting incident (on 2025-07-10) and one
non-specific mouth ulcer (on 2025-09-10) since the last dental
cleaning.

### Aborted pause of sauerkraut and walnuts (2025-10-15 to 2025-10-19)

On Wednesday 2025-10-15, I paused sauerkraut consumption ahead of the
dental cleaning, to reduce the risk of mouth ulcers. The calendar
reminder had been for Tuesday 2025-10-14, but I delayed the pause by
one day.

On Thursday 2025-10-16, I finished my walnuts packet with the first
meal, and decided to pause walnuts consumption with the second meal,
to reduce the risk of mouth bites, injuries, and ulcers. The calendar
reminder had been for the morning of Thursday 2025-10-16, so I paused
only one meal later than the reminder.

However, on Sunday, 2025-10-19, after two days of low stool volume,
and after crunching data that showed that the walnut stoppage had
resulted in a huge drop in my total food intake, I decided to resume
both sauerkraut and walnuts, while continuing to probe and be careful
around food consumption. I resumed both with my first meal.

More details are in [food_pauses.sql](../../sql/food_pauses.sql).

On Tuesday 2025-10-21, I updated best practices going forward to
incorporate the learnings from recent experience.

### Filling in of forms (sent via email) on 2025-10-21

On Tuesday 2025-10-21, in the morning, I received a few forms from
Total Health Dental Care to fill in prior to the appointment. I saw
the email and filled in the forms in the early afternoon. It's good
that I got these in advance, because historically I've had to fill the
forms in on my phone at the location, which is less convenient.

### Skipping of fermentable foods starting 2025-10-21 (the day before the appointment)

I finished my potatoes/peas prep with the second meal on Monday
2025-10-20, and held off on doing the next round of prep until after
the dental cleaning appointment. This means that I didn't eat much by
way of fermentable foods (other than a little bit of sauerkraut on the
morning of Tuesday 2025-10-21) in either meal on Tuesday 2025-10-21,
and I had no fermentable foods in the first meal on Wednesday
2025-10-22, shortly before the appointment.

### Normal face shaving on 2025-10-21

I completed normal face shaving on Tuesday 2025-10-21 around 4:30 PM,
so that I had a good starting point for a more thorough face shaving
on the morning of Wednesday 2025-10-22.

### Grocery shopping on 2025-10-21

I completed grocery shopping from Trader Joe's on Tuesday 2025-10-21,
so that I had my potatoes and peas ready to prep after returning from
the dental cleaning appointment on Wednesday 2025-10-22. This was
based on past experience where going out shopping after the
appointment and then cooking after that turned into a very long day.

### Dental self-exam checklist execution on 2025-10-21

I executed the dental self-exam checklist. I did most of the checklist
around noon, but took the photos at around 10:30 PM. This provides a
before for the before/after of the dental cleaning, and helps me
understand the state of my teeth going into the dental cleaning
appointment.

### Packing / prep on 2025-10-21 night

I confirmed that I did not need to do any special preparation for the
dental cleaning appointment. I did do a bit of preparatory
optimization.
