# 2025-09-03: right index finger cut under fingernail

## Incident

On Wednesday 2025-09-03, I had just gotten out of Walgreens. I
remembered that I needed to double-check my pockets, so to free up one
hand, I was moving one of my bags from the other hand.

The bags were a bit overfilled with face tissue packs, so the carrying
handles of the two bags were farther apart than usual. This made the
manipulation a little harder than usual, so there was a moment in
between where I felt like I had lost control of one bag (though I
actually still had control of the other handle of that bag, it didn't
feel like it because of the bag being wider open than usual).

My left hand made a rapid instinctive movement to regain control, and
the nail of one of my fingers ended up rapidly touching and pressing
on the base of the fingernail on the back of my right index
finger. This is known to be a more sensitive area of skin in general.

I had a bit of an ouch moment but didn't think much of the impact
itself. However, a few seconds later I noticed bleeding in the area,
with the blood depositing elsewhere on my right index finger and my
right middle finger.

## Followup actions

As the bleeding wasn't continuous, and the pain wasn't much, I decided
to get back home first (the journey was about 5 to 10 minutes) rather
than stopping en route to bandage. After getting home, I was able to
wash off the blood with a normal hospital-style hand wash, and the
washing process did not irritate the would, indicating that it had
successfully clotted. After examining the wound after hand washing, I
decided it was small enough that it wasn't worth the inconvenience of
a bandage given the importance of the right index finger to my
dexterity and mobility.

## Learnings

While this incident was ultimately a very random set of coincidences,
there are a few general learnings.

The main learning is that it's very hard to modulate instinctive
movements after I feel I have lost control of an object, so collateral
damage from such movements in the form of sudden impacts. This is both
because the movements are fast, and because they are executed quickly
without enough planning.

This means it's important to avoid getting in situations where these
sudden movements are needed at all.

In this case, given the goal of trying to transfer a bag from one hand
to another, I should have been particularly mindful of the bags being
wider open than usual, and the implication thereof that there may be
manipulation challenges. Therefore, I should have executed that
initial movement more slowly and thoughtfully, for instance, by
pinching the handles together on each bag to create more space to hold
both bags at the same time in one hand. If needed, I could also have
gone back inside the store where the floor is relatively cleaner,
allowing me to put the bags down, an option I didn't want to avail
outdoors with the dirtier floor.