# 2025-09-10: blood tests

See [here](2025-blood-test-plans-round-2.md) for details on what I am
getting tested as well as the booking process. This document is
focused on the actual blood draw and the preparatory and recovery
steps.

## Preparatory steps

### 2025-09-08 (two days prior): pausing of all supplements

On Monday 2025-09-08, I paused consumption of all supplements. So, my
last supplement consumption prior to the blood draw was on Sunday
2025-09-07.

### 2025-09-08 evening: weather check

On the evening of Monday 2025-09-08, I checked the weather forecast
and confirmed that it was fine for the blood draw.

### 2025-09-09 (one day prior): skipping of all exercises

On Tuesday 2025-09-09, I skipped all exercises in preparation for the
blood draw the next day.

### 2025-09-09 evening (evening prior): end to dinner

On the evening of Tuesday 2025-09-09, the evening prior to the blood
draw, I ended my dinner at 7:46 PM.

I had small amounts of residual food a little later: a little bit of
liquid mix (about half a teaspoon) at 9:05 PM and a single-digit
number of rice grains at around 9:15 PM.

### 2025-09-09 night: packing / prep

I did packing / prep at around 10:30 PM. This included packing the
requisition form (one signed copy and two unsigned copies) as well as
a black pen. I also streamlined some other elements so as to be able
to leave more quickly the next morning for the blood tests.

### 2025-09-09 night: sleep

I closed for sleep at 11:22 PM, got into bed at 12 AM, and went to
sleep at 12:21 AM.

## Day of the blood draw (2025-09-10)

### Morning prep and journey

I got up for mid-sleep urination at 6:44 AM, then went back to sleep
at 6:56 AM.

I woke up at 8:35 AM after an alarm at 8:30 AM.

I left at around 10:09 AM.

I got to the building (3000 Colby St) at around 10:30 AM.

While inside the building but before entering Suite 100, I put my
sunglasses inside, wore my KN95 mask, and sanitized my hands.

I arrived at the location (inside the suite) at around 10:31 AM, right
around 15 minutes prior to my appointment time, which was the time I
was targeting arrival for.

### Checking in at the location

The kiosk was out of service, and there was also a note that only
people with appointments would be serviced at this location. Other
locations that were taking walk-ins were listed, including the 3100
San Pablo Ave location that I had gone to last time.

I took out the requisition form from Marek Diagnostics and the order
receipt from Request A Test (the process took about 2-3 minutes).

Aroud 10:35 AM, the person at the front desk asked me to confirm that
I had an appointment and also asked for my name.

I then had to wait until about 10:40 AM for the front desk person to
be available. I explained that I wanted to process two orders. The
person at the front desk didn't seem to have experience dealing with
prepaid orders that were not coming in through insurance, so she
called in a colleague.

The colleague explained that my Request A Test order receipt was not
the requisition form itself, but she was able to pull up the
requisition form so she didn't need my Request A Test receipt.

For Marek Diagnostics, the lookup process seemed to take longer, but
ultimately they were able to find it.

I was not asked for an id card (normally the kiosk would have asked,
but the kiosk was not operational).

Observations about other stuff going on:

* One couple that came in for a blood test reported their appointment
  time as 11:10 AM. I immediately thought that this must be somebody
  for Quest Diagnostics. The front desk person had the same thought,
  and communicated this, and the couple realized their
  mistake. Fortunately, the two locations are within a couple of
  minutes walking.

* One person was trying to get two orders in and the second order had
  not come through in the LabCorp system when I arrived, but right
  around the time I was called in for the blood draw, it had
  come. This highlights the importance of waiting at least a day or
  two between placing the order and going to the location.

### Blood draw

At around 11 AM, I was called to one of the rooms for the blood draw.

I was asked to confirm my name and date of birth.

For the blood draw process, I used my right hand. I took off the
sweatshirt first.

The phlebotomist asked me to make a fist right before the blood draw
and then release it when she started drawing blood. While I did follow
the instruction, I did not clench my fist so as to avoid some of the
measurement distortions that come from fist clenching and release.

There were a total of 8 tubes to fill with blood. Four were 10 mL
tubes filled to the 8 mL mark. There was one 5 mL tube and three 4 mL
tubes, so the total amount of blood drawn was about 8 * 4 + 5 * 1 + 4
* 3 = 49 mL. I confirmed with the phlebotomist that both orders were
included. She asked me to confirm my name before putting the stickers
on the tubes.

After drawing blood, the phlebotomist gave me a cotton piece to put on
the cut, and a minute later or so she tied around it. She told me to
keep it on for at least 30 minutes and to not lift heavy weights for
60 minutes. I thanked her, left the room, and then left the main suite
after greeting the front desk and getting a quick confirmation that
nothing more was needed.

I left the location around 11:09 AM.

### Journey back

I got back home around 11:31 AM. While I had been thinking of going to
Berkeley Bowl on the way back, the cautionary note about heavy weights
as well as the dew/rain that happened briefly while I was en route
made me change my mind.

## Later events

### Removal of bandage later in the day

I removed the cotton and tie at around 8:28 PM, which was about 9
hours 20 minutes after the blood draw. After examining the wound, I
decided that there was no need for a replacement bandage.

### Resumption of hand gripper exercises two days later (2025-09-12)

Two days later, on Friday 2025-09-12, I resumed hand gripper exercises
in both hands. The calendar reminder only had resumption in one hand,
but I didn't pay attention to it and overall I felt recovered in both
hands, so I just did both hands.
