# 2025-11-08: flu shot

Sections of this document:

* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)
* [Prior preparation](#prior-preparation)
* [Appointment](#appointment)
* [Recovery, documentation, and processing](#recovery-documentation-and-processing)

## Appointment booking

I booked my appointment for the flu shot on Saturday 2025-11-01. The
appointment was for Saturday 2025-11-08 at 3 PM at the Walgreens 2801
Adeline St location

I normally book flu shot appointments for Friday, so that I have the
weekend to recover. This time, however, I decided to do Saturday,
because I booked a DEXA scan on Friday. My hope was to benefit from
overlap between the preparatory steps for both, including the pausing
of strength exercises the prior day, and also benefit from the timing
(I picked a week when I am not on-call, so that I don't need to do
overrides for either).

Right after booking the appointment, I completed the consent form steps.

## Prior preparation

### Calendar reminders and other steps on 2025-11-01

* I created the calendar event for the period from 12:30 PM to 5:30 PM
  on 2025-11-08 and also invited my work email address.

* I created a maintenance window for the period from 10 AM to 7:30 PM
  on 2025-11-08.

* I didn't have to do any on-call overrides as I am not on-call for
  any rotations.

* It's a Saturday so I don't have work calendar events or Slack
  reminders.

* I already have a shopping reminder for two days prior, thanks to
  DEXA.

* I created a calendar reminder for a weather check in the evening on
  Thursday 2025-11-06.

* I already have a reminder to skip all exercise on Thursday
  2025-11-06, and I anyway won't be doing exercise on Friday
  2025-11-07, so I don't need a separate reminder to skip exercises
  for two days prior to the flu shot (this sharing was part of the
  reason I wanted to do these appointments on consecutive days).

* I added reminders to resume strength exercises: left hand hand
  gripper (4 days), right hand hand gripper (7 days), other strength
  exercises (9 days).

* I added reminders to update records, one for the day after and one
  to check CDPH and Walgreens records 4 days after.

* I added a reminder to pause jogging and breath holds the morning of
  the appointment.

* I added a reminder to resume jogging and breath holds 3 days after
  the vaccine.

* I added a packing/prep reminder for the night before the vaccine.

### Skipping of all exercises starting 2025-11-06 (two days before the flu shot)

I skipped all exercises starting two days before the flu shot. Whereas
a flu shot only necessitates skipping strength exercises starting two
days prior, the juxtaposition with the DEXA scan on 2025-11-07 ended
up leading me to skip all exercises.

### Shopping trip in the late afternoon / early evening on 2025-11-06 (two days before the flu shot)

I completed my Trader Joe's shopping trip in the late afternoon /
early evening of 2025-11-06, so that I didn't have to do a shopping
trip with a lot of heavy lifting shortly before or after the flu shot.

### Weather check in the evening on 2025-11-06 (two days before the flu shot)

I checked the weather in the evening on 2025-11-06. The forecast for
2025-11-08 was for 0% probability of rain, and a temperature of around
70-71 degrees Fahrenheit, which is great.

### Packing / prep in the early afternoon on 2025-11-08 (a few hours before the flu shot)

While packing / prep is ideally done the night prior, I was quite
tired the night prior as that was also the day of the DEXA scan and a
lunch with work colleagues, and there wasn't a lot of prep to do, so I
did the prep in the early afternoon on 2025-11-08.

## Appointment

I arrived at the pharmacy counter area at around 2:33 PM and used my
phone to check in. The check-in was successful; I was only asked if I
had felt sick in the past 24 hours. Unlike previous times, there was
no paperwork and no physical signature was needed.

I then waited near the pharmacy counter. I was called at around 2:48
PM. I first talked to the pharmacist, who took my name and confirmed
that I was getting to the flu shot. I then taked to the billing
person, who double-checked my name and asked for my address for
confirmation of my identity; I didn't have to show an id proof. I got
a bill for $0 and a coupon for 20% off my next purchase.

I then waited near the patient health room. At a little after 3 PM, I
was called in by the pharmacist, who still remembered me from the
earlier interaction. She asked for my date of birth as identity
confirmation, reiterated that she was giving the flu shot, and asked
if I preferred the left or right arm. I selected the right arm. She
gave the shot and put the bandage, then gave me the information sheet
with dose details. The vaccine I got was Fluarix with a dose of 0.5
mL.

After being done, I did a bit of shopping at Walgreens, checked out at
3:11 PM (applying the 20% discount coupon that I had received with the
flu shot), then rearranged things a bit in store, and then headed back
home.

## Recovery, documentation, and processing

### Completion of documentation

I completed the updating of internal records (not including the
California digital vaccine record check, that cannot be done
immediately) at around 4:45 PM, about 1.5 hours after getting the flu
shot.

### Minimal symptoms (slight soreness on touch, slightly more difficulty with heavy weights)

I experienced minimal symptoms after the flu shot. The only noticeable
symptom was a slight soreness on touch, and occasionally a little bit
of soreness if I paid attention to the area. It wasn't distracting
when I was focused on other stuff.

When I was doing laundry on Monday 2025-11-10, I noticed that the
lifting of the laundry clothes felt a little more effortful and
fatiguing than it normally would. This is what I would expect given
the weakening of the arm muscles by the flu shot. It wasn't enough to
significantly inconvenience me, but it did reinforce the wisdom of my
deliberate pause of strength exercises over the period.

### Bandage removal

I removed the flu shot bandage at around 11:45 PM on 2025-11-09, about
33 hours after the flu shot.

### Resumption of jogging on 2025-11-11

I resumed jogging on Tuesday 2025-11-11, three days after the flu
shot, as per the plan. For reasons unrelated to the flu shot (namely
scheduling issues driven partly by the [finger injury in the
morning](2025-11-11-right-index-finger-impact-against-bottom-of-kitchen-shelves.md)),
I did at-home jogging instead of going out to jog.

### Resumption of breath holds and hand gripper exercises with the left hand on 2025-11-12

On Wednesday 2025-11-12, I resumed breath holds and hand gripper
exercises with the left hand. For both, I was able to perform at or
above my usual standard.

### Updating of digital vaccine records on 2025-11-15

On Saturday 2025-11-15 (somewhat delayed from the scheduled date of
Wednesday 2025-11-12) I updated my California digital vaccine record
to reflect the flu shot and also saved a copy of my Walgreens digital
vaccine record.
