# 2025-04-16: dental cleaning

I have a dental cleaning appointment for Wednesday 2025-04-16 at Total
Health Dental Care at 3017 Telegraph Avenue for a regular dental
cleaning at 1 PM. The previous dental cleaning had been on
[2024-10-09](../2024/2024-10-09-dental-cleaning.md).

Sections of this document:

* [Prior preparation](#prior-preparation)
* [Appointment](#appointment)
* [Feedback and discussion](#feedback-and-discussion)
* [Aftereffects and followup](#aftereffects-and-followup)

## Prior preparation

### Pause of intense and hard foods

* 2025-04-08 (Tuesday, 8 days before the appointment): I paused
  sauerkraut starting on this day (so my last sauerkraut consumption
  was with the first meal on Monday 2025-04-07).

* 2025-04-11 (Friday, 5 days before the appointment): I paused walnuts
  starting thie day (so my last walnuts consumption was with the
  second meal on Thursday 2025-04-10).

### Dental self-exam

On Monday 2025-04-14, I executed the dental self-exam
checklist. Nothing was flagged as unusual.

### Face shaving

I did a round of normal face shaving on Tuesday 2025-04-15 evening and
a round of thorough face shaving on the morning of Wednesday
2025-04-16 (the day of the dental cleaning) around 9:45 AM.

### Groceries purchase

I made a trip to Trader Joe's on Tuesday 2025-04-15 to purchase
groceries, so that I would have groceries ready to cook when returning
from the dental cleaning, and wouldn't have to make another trip after
the dental cleaning for food purchases.

### Skipping of exercise

I skipped all exercises on the morning of Wednesday 2025-04-16.

## Appointment

I arrived at Total Health Dental Care at 12:45 PM.

### Check-in

The receptionist / customer care person was on lunch break so I was
directly called in by the hygienist around 1 PM, and the checkout
procedure was handled later.

I got a different hygienist than usual today, though I've had this
particular hygienist in the past.

### Initial X-rays and examination

The hygienist first took my X-rays. I believe the kind of X-ray is
called "bitewing" -- intraoral X-rays that involve biting down and
where the image is taken via a "wing" on the outside that is a
disk. There were about 6 to 8 images taken with the thing in different
positions in the mouth.

The hygienist then started using the scaler, but the doctor was ready
for the exam so the cleaning was deferred.

### Scaling / scraping of teeth

After the doctor left, the hygienist finished the scaling process. She
initially used a larger tool for suction/irrigation, but I mentioned
that it was a little uncomfortable because it propped my mouth open,
so she switched to the more standard tool. After each round of
scraping, I was supposed to close down on the thing, let it irrigate /
suction, then open my mouth.

Some parts, particularly the lower back right, felt a little painful,
but the pain did not persist after the scraping was finished.

### Polishing and flossing

I am not totally sure of the order, but I got both the prophy cup
polish and a round of mint flossing.

### Differences from other hygienist

* I was not asked to do a mouthwash rinse before starting.

* The other hygienist does polishing before scraping for me, because
  of my stains, but this hygienist followed the more typical sequence
  of scraping and then polishing.

* There was no ozone cleaning unlike the last time (this might be
  because the hygienist simply forgot; I didn't remember until I had
  left either).

### Next appointment

The next appointment was set for Wednesday 2025-10-22 at 1 PM.

### Payment

I paid by reviving my annual subscription for $600. I asked the
receptionist if I should autorenew, and she said it wasn't necessary.

## Feedback and discussion

The doctor commented on two known issues -- the recession and the
staining of the back teeth. The staining was also commented upon by
the hygienist before the doctor came.

### Staining

The doctor confirmed that the stains are not an issue (as long as I
get regular dental cleanings) and if it doesn't concern me from an
aesthetic/consmetic perspective, then nothing needs to be done about
it. Regarding potential causes, I mentioned the miso ginger broth. The
doctor also said that foods high in iron, such as kale and spinach,
can cause these stains. I confirmed that I have a high intake of kale.

### Recession

I mentioned that the doctor had previously pointed out the recession,
and that it doesn't seem to be getting worse in my subjective
estimate. The doctor said that for now we can just keep observing
things and if the regular measurements (taken every alternate
cleaning) show a worsening then we can look more into it.

### Question about cleaning other areas of mouth

I asked the doctor if plaque and tartar can build up in the cheeks and
other areas of the mouth, or whether the fact that there aren't
crevices there makes it hard for buildup. The doctor confirmed that
plaque won't build on the mucosal surfaces, but she said that in
addition to teeth and gums, tongue is an area where soft plaque can
build up (though it will not usually harden into tartar). The tongue
is not covered in regular dental cleaning so I should make sure to
brush it regularly and/or use a tongue scraper.

My personal notes (not discussed): I haven't been consistently
brushing my tongue, partly out of concern related to tongue tip
itchiness, but now that the tongue tip itchiness issues are addressed,
I should resume brushing my tongue 1 or 2 times a day (ideally with
every round of brushing teeth). For the other areas of the mouth, I
will continue to do a single quick sweep with each round of brushing.

## Aftereffects and followup

### Head/neck/shoulder soreness

Through the evening after the dental cleaning, I felt a higher level
of head/neck/shoulder soreness than usual, and therefore also
increased light sensitivity, which is an expected consequence of being
in the posture for an extended period of time.

### No effects on saliva and mouth dryness

At least on the day itself, I did not experience any effects on saliva
or mouth dryness.

### Sore throat sensation (present from two days ago for unrelated reasons) continued to improve

I had had a sore throat sensation from two days ago (this has been off
and on for different reasons in the past month). This had been
improving over the past two days, and the trajectory of improvement
continued. The irrigation during the cleaning itself suppressed the
feeling at the time anyway, but even after that subsided, I continued
to feel the trajectory of improvement.

### No mouth ulcers experienced

The [previous dental cleaning](../2024/2024-10-09-dental-cleaning.md)
had been during the recovery period from mouth ulcers, and the mouth
ulcers got re-inflamed after the cleaning, likely due to the
semi-healed ulcers getting re-aggravated by the dental instruments. I
did not have a similar experience this time, likely because I did not
have any mouth ulcers in the fragile state where they could be
re-inflamed (and also maybe an element of luck).

### A quick visual examination suggests clean teeth and no easily visible stains

I did a quick check in the mirror in the evening on 2025-04-16 (a more
formal check is deferred to a later date) and confirmed that there are
no obvious visible stains. The use of the intraoral mirror and
intraoral camera may reveal smaller stains, but there's nothing that
is macro-visible, unlike the situation right before the dental
cleaning.
