# 2025 exercise tracker

## 2025-01-01: at-home jogging

I did at-home jogging on 2025-01-01. The rest of my exercise proceeded
normally.

## 2025-01-02: skipped exercise due to call with work colleagues

I skipped all exercise due to a call with work colleagues that used up
the time I would normally exercise.

## 2025-01-03 and 2025-01-04: at-home jogging

I did at-home jogging on 2025-01-03 and 2025-01-04. The rest of my
exercise proceeded normally. On both days, this was due to it being
quite cold and my desire to finish jogging soon rather than wait till
later in the day when it would be slightly warmer.

On 2025-01-05, I returned to jogging outside.

## 2025-01-06: abridged at-home jogging and skipped dead hang / pull-ups

On Monday 2025-01-06, I did abridged at-home jogging primarily due to
time constraints (about half the usual length). I also skipped dead
hang and pull-ups, also due to time constraints.

## 2025-01-09: skipping all exercise due to general fatigue plus timing constraints

On 2025-01-09, I skipped exercise due to a mix of general fatigue and
timing constraints. I had stayed up late the previous day, got to bed
late, woke up late, and had a somewhat busy morning. I didn't want to
delay eating too much and I wanted to reset to an earlier time, and
going out to exercise would have delayed things quite a bit.

I was also generally fatigued from the past few hectic days, and also
slightly underslept, and felt that skipping exercise would help me
recover more quickly.

I also have a lot of work to do, and skipping exercise could save me
valuable time and help me get more on top of things.

## 2025-01-12: skipping all exercise due to time crunch for the day (due to sleep time adjustment needed)

Primarily due to a large cyclic personal chores load, I went to sleep
late on 2025-01-11 (around 3 AM), and correspondingly got up late on
the morning of 2025-01-12 (around 11 AM). This would not normally be a
problem, but I need to be up by 9 AM on 2025-01-13 to be ready for
work meetings, which means I effectively have 2 hours less for
2025-01-12. Skipping exercise is the prudent course to achieve this
(because exercise not only directly costs time but also imposes an
additional 1-hour delay on the meal start time).

This might also be generally helpful considering that I am generally
time-squeezed these days.

## 2025-01-13: at-home jogging, hand gripper close failure, and abridged strength exercises

I did at-home jogging on 2025-01-13 due to having a bunch of work
meetings (including some with active participation needed and some
where I was more passive).

I had a bit of soreness in the back of the neck / shoulders yesterday
(with mor on the left shoulder), and although the feeling of soreness
was mostly gone, my strength in those areas was not yet back to
normal. As a result, I was unable to fully close the 150 lb hand
gripper with my left hand. However, when I tried later in the day, I
was able to close it, suggesting that my strength had recovered at
least to some extent.

For strength exercises, I was initially thinking of skipping, then
decided to give them a try to get a benchmark of how much I can do in
this state. I did both the usual exercises for 3 lb and 5 lb with no
difficulty but with greater experienced fatigue than usual. For 8 lb,
I did exercise 1 and then stopped. I did not do exercise 2 on 8 lb or
exercise 1 on 10 lb, partly because I was already exhausted and partly
because I didn't want to risk doing these harder exercises.

For push-ups, I stopped at around 7 or 8 instead of going to the usual
13 or higher. This reflected soreness and fatigue.

## 2025-01-16: at-home jogging due to scheduling issues

On 2025-01-16, despite good weather, I did at-home jogging due to
scheduling issues (I didn't have enough time to go out to jog before a
work meeting).

## 2025-01-17 to 2025-01-19: at-home jogging due to cold weather plus overall time constraints

From 2025-01-17 to 2025-01-19, I did at-home jogging, due to a mix of
cold weather and overall time constraints (no imminent scheduling
issues).

## 2025-01-21: skipping of all exercises except balance exercises

On Tuesday 2025-01-21, in preparation for the next day's blood draw, I
skipped all exercises except balance exercises
(standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed).

## 2025-01-22: skipping of all exercises for blood draw

On Wednesday 2025-01-22, I skipped all exercises for my blood draw,
conserving both time and energy for the blood draw.

## 2025-01-23: resumption of some exercises

On Thursday 2025-01-23, I resumed jogging (going out for it) and also
did humming-with-intermittent-pauses. I skipped hand gripper
exercises. I also didn't do standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercises, but that's just because
they weren't due today as I had done them on Tuesday.

I carried back fairly heavy groceries in the evening on 2025-01-23, so
even though I didn't resume any strength exercises, this did *de
facto* play a similar role.

## 2025-01-24: resumption of hand gripper exercises (left hand only) and skipping of jogging

On Friday 2025-01-24, I skipped jogging in the morning due to time
constraints. In fact I didn't do any exercises at all in the morning.

Instead, I did hand gripper exercises with my left hand only (skipping
my right hand due to the recent blood draw from it) as well as
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercises, both later in the
evening, a little under three hours after finishing my first meal.

## 2025-01-25: resumption of hand gripper exercises (right hand)

On Saturday 2025-01-25, I resumed hand gripper exercises with my right
hand. I had resumed the left hand the previous day, so this completed
the resumption of hand gripper exercises.

## 2025-01-26: resumption of strength exercises

On Sunday 2025-01-26, I resumed strength exercises (dead hang and
pull-ups). This begins a new 3-day cycle, with the next day for dumb
bells and push-ups and the third day for rest from strength exercises.

## 2025-01-27: at-home jogging and skipping of strength exercises due to time constraints and scheduling issues

On Monday 2025-01-27, I did at-home jogging and skipped strength
exercises due to a combination of time constraints and scheduling
issues.

## 2025-01-29 and 2025-01-30: at-home jogging due to cold weather, time constraints, and to allow better multiplexing

On Wednesday 2025-01-29 and Thursday 2025-01-30, I did at-home jogging
due to a mix of considerations: cold weather, time constraints, and
better multiplexing. On Wednesday, I wanted to turn the stove on at
around midway through my jog, and I need to be at home when the stove
is on. On Thursday, I multiplexed part of my jogging with a
listen-only work meeting.

## 2025-01-31: at-home jogging due to cold weather and rain, skipping of strength exercises due to scheduling constraints

On Friday 2025-01-31, I did at-home jogging due to the cold weather
and rain. I also skipped strength exercises due to scheduling
constraints (I needed to finish my second meal by a certain time, and
working backwards that worked out to a tight timeline).

## 2025-02-01 and 2025-02-02: at-home jogging due to rain and wet sidewalks

On 2025-02-01 and 2025-02-02, I did at-home jogging due to rain and
wet sidewalks. The temperature was actually fine (it was not too
cold).

## 2025-02-03: at-home jogging due to intermittent rain

On 2025-02-03, the sidewalks had mostly dried from previous rain, and
it was warm, and I was planning to go out to jog. However, as I was
getting ready to go out, I saw a weather forecast of a brief burst of
rain for the next 30 minutes. In light of this, I cancelled my plan to
go out and did at-home jogging.

## 2025-02-04: at-home jogging due to heavy rain

On 2025-02-04, I did at-home jogging due to heavy rain.

## 2025-02-05: skipping of jogging due to time constraints

2025-02-05 was finally a day of decent weather! This would have been a
good day to do exercise. However, I also wanted to make sure I got
enough time for shopping, and if I did jogging (at-home or outside)
then the post-jogging cooldown period would delay my meal and
therefore my outside trips. So, I reluctantly skipped jogging.

## 2025-02-07: jogging cut short due to watery flatulence + skipping of strength exercises

On 2025-02-07, instead of jogging+walking 2 miles, I did
jogging+walking of about 1 mile. I turned around halfway after having
a watery flatulence (the flatulence was around 12:58 PM), that I
attribute to the bowel cycle disruption yesterday where I wasn't able
to pass stool. Although I did have a large bowel movement this
morning, there was probably still some residual disruption which led
to the watery flatulence.

After getting back, I decided to end exercise for today rather than
continue with at-home jogging, giving me time to deal with the
implications of the flatulence and also allowing my body to recover
more fully from the bowel cycle disruption.

## 2025-02-12: skipped all exercises due to time-sensitive stuff with day job

On Wednesday 2025-02-12, I skipped all exercises due to time-sensitive
stuff with my day job.

## 2025-02-13: skipped most exercises to shift to an earlier sleep cycle while still getting time to wrap up time-sensitive stuff with day job

On Thursday 2025-02-13, I skipped most exercises, in particular
jogging and strength exercises, to be able to shift my sleep cycle
back to normal-ish after staying up and sleeping in late for a couple
of days due to time-sensitive stuff with the day job. Cutting exercise
made the most sense as I still had things to catch up on with the
time-sensitive stuff, so I didn't want to eat into other
time. Moreover, exercise made particular sense because doing exercises
adds not just the time of the exercise but the wait time between
exercise and meal, delaying my whole day. Shifting the day earlier is
most easily accomplished by skipping exercise.

I did do hand gripper exercises (just before my meal) as well as
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercises (after my meal).

## 2025-02-14: continued skipping of strength exercises to shift to an earlier sleep cycle

On Friday 2025-02-14, I continued skipping strength exercises in order
to be able to shift to an earlier sleep cycle. My efforts on Thursday
to shift my cycle had not fully succeeded (I did go to sleep an hour
earlier, but ended up waking at the old time likely to catch up with a
slight sleep backlog).

## 2025-02-17: skipping of jogging to make time for chores and shift to an earlier sleep cycle

On Monday 2025-02-17, I skipped jogging to make time for personal
chores and shift to an earlier sleep cycle. I anyway didn't have to do
strength exercises on this day.

## 2025-02-19: at-home jogging due to wet sidewalks from rain a few hours prior

On Wednesday 2025-02-19, I did at-home jogging as the sidewalks were
wet from rain a few hours prior.

## 2025-02-22: skipping of jogging and strength exercises to make time for chores and shift to an earlier sleep cycle

On Saturday 2025-02-22, I chose to skip jogging and strength
exercises. This was in order to make time for personal chores as well
as shift to an earlier sleep cycle, in light of weather changes (it's
getting warmer, making an earlier sleep cycle more feasible) as well
as meetings earlier in the morning in the coming week.

## 2025-02-23: skipping of strength exercises in anticipation of trips to purchase weights

On Sunday 2025-02-23, I skipped strength exercises. The reason was
two-fold: first, I wanted to make sure I don't delay my first meal too
much, as part of my overall effort to adjust my sleep cycle to
earlier. Second, I anticipated that, later in the day, I would be
making trips to purchase weights, so I expected that carrying the
weights back from organically take care of strength exercise for the
day. I did end up making these trips, and they did indeed organically
take care of strength exercises for the day.

## 2025-02-27: abridged jogging due to time constraints

On Thursday 2025-02-27, I took an abridged jogging route due to time
constraints; jogging about 1.5 miles in total (no return walking)
instead of the usual range of 1.75-2.0 miles jogging and the remainder
of the 2 miles walking.

## 2025-02-28: skipped jogging due to time constraints, but carried heavy load later so got a decent amount of exercise

On Friday 2025-02-28, I skipped jogging due to time constraints
created by an impromptu work meeting (I didn't want to delay eating
too much as that would throw off my schedule). I did do the other
exercises (hand gripper, breath holds,
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed, and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed).

Later in the day, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker to pick up
multiple packages. Overall, I carried a 4.2 kg suitcase one-way and a
7.6 kg load (suitcase filled with stuff) the other way, and both ways
were around 1.2-1.4 miles each. I was able to carry both ways without
needing to put the suitcase down to rest (though I had a handful of
instances where the suitcase hit the ground or my legs), so it was a
decent amount of exercise and also confirmed my strength and stamina.

## 2025-03-03: skipping jogging due to scheduling constraints

On Monday 2025-03-03, I skipped jogging due to scheduling
constraints. Specifically, I was in meetings from 11:30 AM to 1 PM and
also doing time-sensitive stuff in the gaps within and between the
meetings, so although I was able to finish hand gripper exercises,
standing-on-one-leg exercises, and the
humming-with-intermittent-pauses exercise, I did not get time for
jogging. If I then went jogging at 1 PM, that would delay the start of
my first meal to at least 2:30 PM, and probably even later, which
would delay my second meal and also delay my sleep. I didn't want to
do this, so I decided to skip jogging.

The background factor here is that the weather has taken a turn for
the cold, which is jeopardizing my recent switch to an earlier sleep
schedule, but I need to maintain that switch otherwise things will get
super-hard once the daylight savings switch happens.

## 2025-03-11: skipping jogging (and therefore also strength exercises) to help with daylight saving adjustment

On Tuesday 2025-03-11, I skipped jogging (and therefore also strength
exercises) to help me adjust more quickly to the daylight saving time
and its attendant obligations in terms of waking up earlier and
sleeping earlier. By the time I was ready to go jogging, it was
already around 1:25 PM, so going jogging would have delayed my meal
start to around 3:10 PM whereas if I didn't, I could start my meal
around 1:40 PM; this difference of 1.5 hours could be quite helpful
with helping me switch to an earlier cycle of sleeping and waking up.

I did do hand gripper exercises as usual and also took blood pressure
readings (the act of taking blood pressure readings is part of what
delayed me).

## 2025-03-12 to 2025-03-14 and 2025-03-17: at-home jogging due to rain

From Wednesday 2025-03-12 to Friday 2025-03-14 and on Monday
2025-03-17, I did at-home jogging due to the rain.

## 2025-03-18: skipping jogging due to delays and in order to be able to sleep early

On Tuesday 2025-03-18, I skipped jogging due to waking up late
(understandably given the cold and sleeping a bit late). The goal was
to be able to sleep early in light of a meeting at 10 AM tomorrow.

## 2025-03-19: skipping of all exercise and beginning of pause of strength exercises and hand gripper exercise

On Wednesday 2025-03-19, I skipped all exercise due to a meeting with
work colleagues in the morning. I also began a longer pause of
strength exercises and hand gripper exercise for a COVID-19 vaccine
appointment scheduled for Friday 2025-03-21.

## 2025-03-21 to 2025-03-23: skipping of all exercise related to COVID-19 vaccine

From Friday 2025-03-21 to Sunday 2025-03-23, I skipped all exercise
for the COVID-19 vaccine that I got on Friday 2025-03-21. See
[here](2025-03-21-pfizer-covid-vaccine-updated-booster-dose.md) for details on the vaccine.

## 2025-03-24: resumption of jogging (at-home and shorter duration) and standing-with-eyes-closed exercises

On Monday 2025-03-24, three days after the COVID-19 booster dose, per
the [best practices around vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.d),
I resumed jogging. However, I stuck to jogging at home and jogged for
a reduced duration of about 15 minutes. The choice of at-home jogging
was due to a mix of time constraints and a desire to be more
conservative as I was still not fully back to a normal level of
energy. At-home jogging gives more flexibility to stop at any time.

I also resumed standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercises.

## 2025-03-25: resumption of hand gripper exercises (left hand only); hold durations a little below the low end of typical

On Tuesday 2025-03-25, four days after the COVID-19 booster dose, per
the [best practices around vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.d),
I resumed hand gripper exercises in my left hand (the non-vaccine
arm).

For the 150 lb hand gripper, I managed 8 seconds in my left hand in an
almost-closed position, compared to my usual of being able to fully
close for between 10 and 25 seconds.

For the 100 lb hand gripper, I managed 20 seconds in my left hand,
compared to my usual range of 20 to 35 seconds (but this usual range
is after a much more exhausting close of the 150 lb hand gripper than
I did today).

## 2025-03-25: continued at-home jogging for shorter duration

On Tuesday 2025-03-25, I continued to stick to at-home jogging (I had
resumed at-home jogging the previous day, Monday 2025-03-24). I did
not get back to the full duration for at-home jogging of about 30
minutes, but I did go up to about 19 minutes compared to about 15
minutes yesterday.

My reasons for continuing with at-home jogging were to maintain the
flexibility to stop at any time, as well as a desire to avoid the hot
sun (uncharacteristically, the outdoor temperature was already higher
than the indoor temperature *and* it was sunny).

## 2025-03-26: resumption of breath holds and return to outside jogging reaching threshold distance

On Wednesday 2025-03-26, I resumed breath holds, with my performance
(in terms of duration of breath holds) within the normal range. I also
went for outside jogging for the first time since the vaccine. The
distance I jogged was just a little over the threshold of 1.67 miles
(I generally record when I dip below the threshold).

## 2025-03-28: resumption of hand gripper exercises in right hand

On Friday 2025-03-28, four days after the COVID-19 booster dose, per
the [best practices around vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.d),
I resumed hand gripper exercises in my right hand (the vaccine arm). I
had already resumed the exercises in my left hand since Tuesday
2025-03-25 (three days ago). I was able to resume the right hand at
the usual level.

## 2025-03-28: at-home jogging due to wet sidewalks and recent rain

On Friday 2025-03-28, I opted for at-home jogging instead of going out
to jog. This was because of wet sidewalks from recent rain, even
though it did appear to have stopped raining.
