# 2025-06: respiratory infection (likely common cold)

## Executive summary

I appear to have gotten a respiratory infection, likely the common
cold, probably as a result of being exposed to it during my return
journey from Bengaluru to San Francisco that included a lengthy
international flight.

## Progression by day

### Lengthy international travel (Friday 2025-06-06 to Saturday 2025-06-07)

Some general comments on the travel:

* I wore a KN95 mask from the time I entered Bengaluru International
  Airport till I got down at the BART station near my home, with brief
  breaks for airing and meals / drinking water and juice, and with
  changes to my mask roughly once every 8 hours. I expect this reduced
  the viral load of any infection I was exposed to.

* Of the various portions of the journey, the one that I think is most
  likely to have led to the infection is the international flight from
  Delhi to San Francisco, as I was in a relatively crowded plane for a
  period of about 16 hours with people. There was some coughing and
  sneezing around me, though it's hard to pinpoint how much was just
  normal, how much was due to the environment of the plane, and how
  much was due to the person being sick.

  The other legs were ones where I had relatively short durations of
  exposure to any particular person, and where there was much more air
  circulation.

### Arrival at home in Berkeley (Saturday 2025-06-07) and next day (Sunday 2025-06-08)

After arriving at my home in Berkeley on Saturday 2025-06-07, I felt
mostly fine, and proceeded as normal / planned. The only adverse
conditions were general timezone adjustment / fatigue and a bit of
diarrhea from the food on and prior to the flight on Saturday
afternoon. The GI issues normalized by Sunday morning whereas the
timezone adjustment / fatigue also improved significantly on Sunday.

I did not go out at all on Saturday. I went to sleep at 8:51 PM.

On Sunday, I woke up at 4:44 AM, after waking up for urination at 3:13
AM and then resting in bed in a semi-sleepy state until I woke up. I
spent the morning on day job stuff, travel documentation, and followup
items and the afternoon/evening on unpacking and a trip to Trader
Joe's for grocery shopping. These proceeded mostly normally. I ended
up staying up fairly late, going to sleep at 12:35 AM. Overall, this
was a highly productive day in terms of my accounted-for hours across
a mix of day job, personal chores (travel and food purchases) and
listening to videos. The flip side is that yes, I was up for about 20
hours straight (a result of both the large amount of post-travel stuff
to do and the whole timezone realignment process), but note that I did
get about 8 hours of sleep the prior night.

Regarding the Trader Joe's trip: I masked up for most of the store
trip (other than the first and last half minute at the entrance area)
and was not in the store for too long, so I consider it unlikely that
I either got infected here or passed the infection on to anybody else
(at this point I didn't have any symptoms, and in particular I didn't
have any symptoms that result in greater transmission, such as
coughing or a runny nose).

### Monday 2025-06-09: symptoms appear overnight, but the day mostly still proceeds normally and I don't suspect an infection

I woke up at 2:23 AM to urinate on the morning of Monday 2025-06-09,
and this is the first time I noticed a sore throat. I was also in a
somewhat discombobulated state overall. I didn't think much of the
sore throat, attributing it to excess sauerkraut consumption the
previous day. I went back to sleep at 2:39 AM.

I did another mid-sleep urination at 6:43 AM, then went back to sleep
again at 6:50 AM, but I did not fall back to sleep fully.

I finally woke up for real at 7:26 AM.

The day proceeded mostly normally other than the sore throat (that I
still attributed to sauerkraut rather than an infection). I was able
to attend work meetings including one where I talked a nontrivial
amount, so the sore throat didn't get too much in the way there. I
didn't really investigate it as a potential infection. In the evening,
I made a trip to Berkeley Bowl. I went to sleep at 9:46 PM.

Regarding the Berkely Bowl trip: I followed the usual practice of
masking while in the store, except briefly for half a minute at the
exit (the putting-on was outside the store). I already had the sore
throat symptom at this point, so I didn't get the infection here. I
also consider it very unlikely that I passed it to anybody, given that
I didn't have transmission-increasing symptoms (cough, running nose,
etc.) at this point, and given that I was in the store briefly and
masked up while in the store, and was not in proximity to any specific
individual for more than a couple of minutes.

There were a couple of other symptoms I might have started
experiencing, but didn't pay attention to:

* My subjective temperature perception may have started getting
  skewed, i.e., I found the environment colder than I would. But the
  effect wasn't huge; in particular, I still kept the window open
  throughout the day and night and didn't really feel the urge to
  close it.

* I might have experienced slight muscle aches, but I didn't really
  pay attention, as it's hard to disambiguate from other potential
  causes of minor soreness (including a recent lengthy international
  trip plus timezone adjustment fatigue / jetlag).

* I'm not sure if this started Monday or later on Tuesday, but I think
  it was Monday: I felt that the food tasted and smelled a little
  different; in particular, I was noticing some parts of the flavor of
  the food to be more prominent than they would usually be. In
  hindsight, I suspect that my nasal congestion was blocking some
  aspects of my sense of smell and there was neurological compensation
  that accentuated smells in response, so I was experiencing smells in
  a bit of a lopsided fashion. At the time, though, I didn't have this
  context, so I wondered/worried that maybe the food is spoiled. But
  it didn't really make sense because I was experiencing this
  sensation across disparate foods including stuff that I had
  purchased recently and stuff that had been in the refrigerator for a
  while.

### Tuesday 2025-06-10: I start suspecting and investigating an infection

On the morning of Tuesday 2025-06-10, I woke up at 6:18 AM. As the
sore throat continued, I got more confident based on its qualia that
this was an infection, not just a reaction to food. I suspected a
respiratory infection. Also, by this point the subjective temperature
perception difference was clear, even going so far as to be labeled
"chills" (though this is likely just the morning being colder in
general). I estimated at least 2-3 degrees Celsius subjective
temperature perception difference.

At around 7:22 AM, I took forehead temperatures to check if I have a
fever. The temperatures agreed with my subjective assessment that I
don't have a fever. The readings were 98.7 middle, 97.6 left, 97.8
right.

My next step was to take an at-home COVID test. I did this test over
the period from 7:58 AM to 8:27 AM, after spending a few minutes
watching a video explaining the test. The test was negative. More
details are [here](2025-06-10-walgreens-covid-test.md).

I then took a pulse oximeter reading. The pulse oximeter failed to
start up, so I replaced the battery and then it worked. The first
reading, with observation period 8:39:15 AM to 8:42:15 AM, showed a
SpO2 of 85-92% (dropping from the high end to the low end over the
observation period). The heart rate of 55-60 bpm was normal for
me. See
[pulse_oximeter_readings.sql](../../sql/pulse_oximeter_readings.sql) for details.

This SpO2 was low and got me even more suspicious of a respiratory
infection causing congestion. But I also wasn't sure how reliable the
reading was. I took another reading 9:06:45 AM to 9:08:45 AM. This
time the SpO2 was closer to normal (95-96%) while the heart rate
remained normal (53-65 bpm). So, it looked like the SpO2 situation was
no longer dire.  See
[pulse_oximeter_readings.sql](../../sql/pulse_oximeter_readings.sql) for details.

I triggered various contingency plans, such as notifying my workplace
that I likely had an infection, and rearranging my outdoor trip plans
to defer them by a few days and focus on at-home tasks for the more
immediate future.

At 9:57 AM, I closed the window; this made me feel better. The window
would stay in a closed state for a while.

I was also experiencing more fatigue than usual during the day. I took
an extra n-acetylcysteine with my first meal (I normally take one 600
mg, this time I took two instead). I finished my meal at 12:35 PM.

At 3:41 PM, I closed for what I intended to be a nap of a couple of
hours (alarm set for 6 PM). At 3:54 PM, I went to sleep. When I was
woken up by the alarm at 6 PM, I decided to stay in bed a little
longer. I woke up briefly again around 8 PM. I did a few quick chores
from bed for a few minutes and then went back to sleep. As a result, I
ended up having only one meal on this day.

### Wednesday 2025-06-11: runny nose begins

Ultimately, I got up to urinate at 2:11 AM. I tried going back to
sleep at 2:26 AM, but couldn't fall asleep (which is understandable
considering I had slept over 10 hours). I officially woke up at 3:04
AM.

I got a normal pulse oximeter reading at around 3:45 AM. See
[pulse_oximeter_readings.sql](../../sql/pulse_oximeter_readings.sql)
for details.

I didn't keep great records of the details, but this is the day my
nose started running a nontrivial amount. The sore throat improved,
and I also had an occasional cough, but it was the runny nose that was
the highlight of the day. My estimate at the time was about 2 to 3
times blowing my nose per hour, and 1 to 3 times sneezing per hour,
but based on better recording I started the next day, I might have
underestimated the frequency of nose blowing.

I stayed at home the whole day, but other than that and the runny
nose, had a relatively normal day -- I did rice prep at home, spent a
bunch of time on the day job at almost-normal productivity, had my
full quota of two meals, and went to sleep at a relatively normal-ish
time of 7:27 PM (this is still early, but I was aiming for early to
get enough extra sleep to help me recover from the infection).

I also pieced together the symptoms so far and came up with a
tentative diagnosis of the common cold, as opposed to the flu or COVID
(more details are in the diagnosis section below).

### Thursday 2025-06-12: better documentation

On Thursday 2025-06-12, I got up to urinate at 1:58 AM. I went back to
sleep at 2:13 AM, but did not fully fall asleep. I woke up from this
semi-sleepy state at 4:53 AM.

I also had the interesting observation that I hadn't needed to blow my
nose during the time I was asleep, but did need to blow my nose during
the times I was semi-sleepy in bed (from 2:13 AM to 4:53 AM).

One insight I had is that the frequency with which I need to blow my
nose can give me some insight into whether I am ready to go out
again. Roughly speaking, I want all my time in the indoor setting of a
store to be free of the need for nose blowing. So, in order to better
assess my progression on this front, I decided to document every time
I blew my nose and every time I sneezed.

So starting around 5:13 AM I began documenting nose-blowing and
sneezing. As of 7:35 AM, I had sneezed twice, and nose-blowing
started off at about once every 10 minutes early in the day and then
slowed down to once every 15 to 20 minutes (the high initial frequency
might be because of catch-up from the slowdown at night?).

Shortly after a morning bath, I opened the window as I now felt warm
enough. The window would stay open throughout the day and for part of
the night (I would eventually close it at 3:17 AM the next day).

There was a reduction in the frequency of blowing my nose for a few
hours after the bath, which was particularly convenient as I had a few
work meetings where I needed to talk for a length of time. The
frequency went back to the previous norm of about once every 20
minutes later in the afternoon. I was able to do a round of laundry,
by taking care to clear my nose right before going down for laundry
and then clearing my nose after returning from laundry.

I noticed one interesting symptom during my second meal that might or
might not be related to the infection. I felt transient pain in my
gums when chewing and biting food, and this pain was experienced in
all four corners of the mouth (top left, top right, bottom left,
bottom right). The pain doesn't reflect any dental or gum issue -- I
practice regular brushing and flossing hygiene and did not experience
any pain or anything unusual during those, before and after this
pain. Moreover, if there were a tooth or gum issue, it would tend to
be localized to a specific region. My suspicion is that the congestion
created by the infection had some effect on the way either the
peripheral nerves were sending signals or the way my CNS was
processing those signals. This symptom continued a little bit on
Friday morning in an attenuated form, but had mostly disappeared by
the end of Friday morning.

I went to sleep at 9:01 PM.

### Friday 2025-06-13: slight reduction in frequency of nose-blowing

On Friday 2025-06-13, I got up to urinate at 3:11 AM. Similar to the
previous night, I didn't have any need to blow my nose during the
period of sleep. However, after I got back in bed from this urination,
and didn't fully fall asleep, I did feel mucus accumulating in my
nose. I blew it once at 3:42 AM but the rate of accumulation was slow
enough that I next needed to clear my nose only when I woke up
officially which was around 5:07 AM.

The frequency of nose-blowing in the early morning was relatively low
compared to yesterday, with a gap of almost two hours between
successive nose-blowing at 6:06 AM and 8:01 AM. The frequency picked
up a bit after that, but was generally something in the range of 30 to
90 minutes; however, I did generally start feeling the mucus
accumulation around 10 to 15 minutes after the last clearing of the
nose.

## Diagnosis: likely common cold

The symptoms pretty clearly fit a respiratory infection, and the
timeline suggests that the flight is how I got it.

I'm not sure what kind of respiratory infection it is. As of Wednesday
2025-06-11, after finally experiencing a runny nose, I am inclined in
favor of the common cold as opposed to COVID and the flu. Some of the
reasons:

* The symptom pattern also matches the common cold more than the flu
  or COVID; see
  [here](https://pharmacy.msu.edu/resources/how-to-tell-cold-and-flu-symptoms-apart). For
  instance:

  * My symptom onset was gradual, as opposed to sudden for the flu.

  * I didn't have a fever; fever is rare for the common cold but
    normal for the flu and COIVD.

  * I had runny nose, sneezing, sore throat, and (occasional) cough --
    all symptoms that are common in the common cold and sometimes /
    rare for flu and COVID.

* I got a negative result for the COVID test. I also got a COVID
  vaccine recently on 2025-03-21 (see
  [here](2025-03-21-pfizer-covid-vaccine-updated-booster-dose.md)).

* I also got a flu vaccine on 2024-10-25, about 7.5 months ago (see
  [here](../2024/2024-10-25-flu-shot.md)).
