# 2025-02-17 to 2025-04-16: increased frequency of mild sore throat incidents with varying proximal causes

Between 2025-02-17 and 2025-04-16, I experienced an increased
frequency of mild sore throat incidents, generally lasting somewhere
from 1 to 3 days, with the proximal cause being different across
them. The frequency dropped after the [2025-04-16 dental
cleaning](2025-04-16-dental-cleaning.md).

Whereas the normal frequency of incidents of this level of mildness is
somewhere around once every 3 to 6 weeks, over this period I
experienced the incidents at a frequency of roughly once a week.

I am writing this public document retrospectively by piecing together
highlights from privately recorded incidents.

## Shared symptoms and non-symptoms

In all cases, I experienced a sense of irritation in some area of the
back of mouth (upper throat), lower throat (lower esophagus), or, more
rarely, the ear/nose system (as if stuff had refluxed into my ear or
nose).

In only some of the cases was there direct evidence of actual reflux,
and the magnitude of such reflux was generally small.

Only rarely was my voice or oral stamina / ability to speak affected,
though there was more often an effect on how pleasant it was to speak
and sing, so, for instance, I was a bit less likely to hum or sing to
myself when doing dishes and the like.

None of the incidents was severe enough to meaningfully get in the way
of my normal life. Some of the incidents did trigger brief pauses of
walnuts, sauerkraut, and cayenne pepper.

## List of individual incidents and identified proximal causes

Details of the incidents are in private notes. Here, I list the dates
and proximal causes where identified:

* 2025-02-17: reflux and sneezing after second meal where I had a
  multigrain sandwich bread that I don't usuall have.

* 2025-02-28: throat tension and burping after meal that lasted much
  longer than usual.

* 2025-03-07 onward till around 2025-03-11: increased sore throat
  attributed to excess of cayenne pepper with meal prep.

* 2025-03-14 to 2025-03-16: sore throat after meal that continued for
  a few days, possibly attributed to increased cayenne pepper use.

* 2025-03-23: sore throat despite using a relatively low amount of
  cayenne pepper.

* 2025-03-28: upper throat / back of mouth dryness after two days of
  lentils consumption.

* 2025-04-02 partly continuing into 2025-04-03: throat tightness /
  tingling likely due to high ratio of olive oil + cayenne pepper to
  cooked meal.

* 2025-04-09 to about 2025-04-11: irritation after swallowing saliva
  on 2025-04-09; overall irritation over these few days suspected to
  be due to using a vanilla-flavored vegan yogurt for a little
  while. Things returned to normal as I switched to regular vegan
  yogurt.

* 2025-04-14: a bit of reflux that I attributed to maybe having more
  miso ginger broth than usual.

## Likely background factors

* Cold weather causing dryness of mouth due to drooling at night

* Maybe some accumulation of plaque / tartar etc. since the last
  dental cleaning (on 2024-10-09) contributed to the ease of
  irritation, and the dental cleaning helped reset things.

Overall, I consider many of the individual incidents to be valuable
learning experiences. For instance, learning that when I cook a
smaller amount, but use the same amount of olive oil and cayenne
pepper as for a larger prep, I can get the lower throat irritation
from olive oil, tells me that when I have less to cook, I should use
less olive oil and cayenne pepper. While simple, this is a useful
lesson (and one that I don't usually get to learn because I normally
cook a full pot).

Similarly, the experience of how cumin can have a clearing effect, and
how adding a bit more cumin can be helpful, was valuable as it gives
me an additional tool to deal with sore throats of some kinds.

I will compare notes with the period starting about 4 months after
this dental cleaning to see if the incidence goes up. This time, the
corresponding period will be warm rather than cold, so we will be able
to more clearly disambiguate the role of temperature versus time since
last dental cleaning. It may also be the case that my greater wisdom
based on the individual incidents results in fewer incidents overall,
despite similar background factors.
