# 2025-01-22: blood tests

See [here](2025-blood-test-plans-round-1.md) for details on what I am
getting tested as well as the booking process. This document is
focused on the actual blood draw and the preparatory and recovery
steps.

## 2025-01-15: email received notifying me of the appointment location being closed

On 2025-01-15, in the evening, I received an email from LabCorp
notifying me that the 3000 Colby St location was closed until
mid-February. My plan is to go to the 3100 San Pablo Ave
location. Unfortunately, it's too late to book an appointment with the
location, so my plan is to try a walk-in, because an appointment for a
later date won't work with my schedule. If I am unable to get a blood
draw at the location on that date, I will likely book an appointment
some time later (likely mid-March or so) at the 3000 Colby St
location, which will likely be open by that time.

## Preparatory steps

### 2025-01-20 (two days prior): pause of all supplements

Starting Monday 2025-01-20, I paused all supplements.

### 2025-01-20 evening: weather check

I'd been monitoring the weather forecast over the past few days and
knew that rain on the day of the blood tests was unlikely. I did an
official check on 2025-01-20 around 5:30 PM, by which time we were
within the 48-hour window where weather forecasts are reasonably
accurate. The probability of rain over the time period was shown as 0%
and the forecasted temperature was not too low (56 degrees Fahrenheit
at 11 AM).

### 2025-01-21: skipping of all exercises except balance exercises

On Tuesday 2025-01-21, in preparation for the next day's blood draw, I
skipped all exercises except balance exercises
(standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed).

### 2025-01-21: early end to dinner

I finished dinner at 8:27 PM. I had a few crumbs and sips during the
cleaning process, with the last such sip at around 9 PM, but for
"fasting" purposes the dinner can be considered to have finished at
8:27 PM.

### 2025-01-21: packing / prep

I did packing / prep at around 10 PM. This included packing the
requisition form (one signed copy and two unsigned copies) as well as
a black pen. I also streamlined some other elements so as to be able
to leave more quickly the next morning for the blood tests.

### Going to sleep

I got in bed at 12:12 AM, relaxed a little bit, and finally went to
sleep (in the sense of lying down with eyes closed) at 12:29 AM.

## Day of the blood draw (2025-01-22)

### Morning prep and journey

The positive of no longer having an appointment was that I didn't need
to show up at a specific time. The downside was both a longer walk to
the location and potentially (and actually) longer wait time at the
location.

My plan was to arrive at the location somewhere between 10:30 AM and
11 AM. To that end, I set my morning alarms for 8:45 AM and 9 AM. I
acked both alarms but stayed in bed for a bit longer, finally getting
out of bed (and officially waking up) at 9:03 AM.

At 10:23 AM, after getting ready, I drank a bunch of water. I then put
stuff in my pockets and headed out. I took a route that was parallel
to but not on main streets, as it meant minimal traffic so minimal
waiting for traffic or lights at intersections.

### Locating LabCorp in the building, plus info on the building layout

I arrived at the 3100 San Pablo Ave building a little before 11 AM. I
put my sunglasses inside and sanitized my hands. I looked at the
directory downstairs and saw that LabCorp was in suite 320, so I used
the elevator to get to the third floor and then looked around. I
initially missed suite 320 because it's actually a combined suite 320
and 330, and I initially only saw the "330" suite number for
it. However, after looking around and ruling out other possible
locations for the suite, I looked again and saw 320.

When entering, there is a common waiting area. Behind that waiting
area are counters. The two right counters (counters 1 and 2) are for
LabCorp ("suite 320") and the three left counters (counters 3, 4, and
5) are for UCSF imaging that is part of the [Berkeley Outpatient
Center](https://www.johnmuirhealth.com/locations/outpatient-center-berkeley.html)
managed in partnership with John Muir Health. To the right of the
right counters is the locked entrance to the LabCorp suites and to the
left of the imaging counters sthe entrance to the UCSF imaging rooms.

The floor also includes an urgent care facility (suite 300) and a
primary care facility (suite 310). The floor on the whole seems to be
managed by John Muir Health.

The building has the unusual feature of having rooftop parking on the
third floor. In fact, to the right we could see the parking. It also
has basement parking. However, the first floor is not healthcare stuff --
it has a City Sports Club location (suite 110).

### Express check-in

After entering, I located the express check-in kiosks (to my
immediate right and facing back toward the wall separating from the
hallway).I had to place my state ID
card back side up and it auto filled my details and asked me to
confirm. I also needed to confirm not having had anything to eat or
drink for the past 12 hours except water and black coffee. The
check-in finished a little after 11 AM.

Only one of the LabCorp counters was open, and things were proceeding slowly.

### Waiting and intake

I initially stayed standing, but after seeing how things were
proceeding, I took a seat. I also took out my signed requisition form
so I could present it quickly.

The patient care coordinator behind the counter was asking people for
their requisition form or order, and emphasized to everybody the
importance of getting a printout and presenting it to reduce the risk
of missing out a test that was intended. In most cases, LabCorp had
the tests in their system already, but not always.

I was called at around 11:20 AM. I presented my requisition form. It
looks like he already had the details on his computer, and was able to
compare and confirm. He printed another page out that seemed to just
have scannable codes. He kept my signed requisition form along with
that other printout.

I then waited for a while. At some point, I decided to use the time to
finish a bunch of small note-taking and note-updating on my phone, so
I did that. Ultimately, I was called for the blood draw at around
noon.

I also overheard from the patient care coordinator (when he was
responding to another patient) that the reason some of the other
locations are closed is that many of the staff have the flu, so they
are short-staffed and can't cover all locations. Seems like this is a
regular feature of winter? This might be useful information when
trying to time tests in the future.

### Blood draw

I was asked to confirm my last name and date of birth (I had been
called using my first name).

I had the blood draw done in my right arm. I rolled up my sweatshirt
to expose the area for the blood draw.

The person doing the blood draw asked me to open and close my fist
multiple times. I think he was doing this to confim the structure of
my veins so he could figure out the right place to poke. Ultimately,
he poked one of my veins a little bit on the right side and filled the
test tubes of blood.

I asked him how they know how much blood to draw. He said they have a
software that does the calculations for them. I also asked him whether
the separate tubes were for different labs (I meant lab locations). He
clarified that they were for different departments.

I also mentioned that I don't usually come to this location and I go
to the one near the Sutter hospital. This one seems more crowded. Is
that generally the case, or is it because the other location is
closed? He said that this location may be more popular because of the
availability of more parking space.

While drawing blood, he asked me how I was feeling. I said it's not
fun, but it's not too painful. Although I didn't say it, my impression
is that the total amount of blood for this draw (about 10-12 mL) was
a little less than for previous blood draws, likely because there was
no additional complex test that needed to go to a different facility.

After finishing the blood draw, he gave me a gauze to hold against the
wound, then he brought out tape and taped around it. He told me to
keep it on for 20 minutes.

### Journey back and replacement with waterproof flex bandage

I left the location around 12:07 PM. After getting back and unpacking,
about 40-50 minutes since the blood draw, I removed the tape and gauze
(which were anyway a bit shifted by this time) and put a waterproof
flex bandage.

### Notes on urination and fluid intake

I urinated less than usual on the day of the blood draw. As usual, I
urinated before each meal and after the post-meal cleanup of each
meal. However, normally I also urinate at least once between the
post-meal cleanup urination of the first meal and the pre-meal
urination of the second meal. I also do a pre-exercise urination. I
didn't have any equivalent to either of these urinations on this day,
even though I had a larger-than-usual gap between meals. This may
partly be because it did get warm during the day, but it may also be
reflective of the fluid reduction accomplsihed through the blood draw.

## Later days

### Resumption of some exercises on 2025-01-23

On Thursday 2025-01-23, I resumed jogging (going out for it) and also did
humming-with-intermittent-pauses. I skipped hand gripper exercises. I
also didn't do standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed and
standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercises, but that's just because
they weren't due today as I had done them on Tuesday.

I carried back fairly heavy groceries in the evening on 2025-01-23, so
even though I didn't resume any strength exercises, this did *de
facto* play a similar role.

### Removal of bandage

I removed the waterblock flex bandage on 2025-01-24 at 12:41 AM, almost 36 hours after having put it on.

### Resumption of hand gripper exercises with left hand (not the blood draw arm) on 2025-01-24

I did hand gripper exercises with my left hand (my blood draw was from
the right arm) around 6:07 PM, almost three hours after my first meal,
about about 2 days 6 hours after the blood draw. This was my first
time doing hand gripper exercises after the blood draw.

### Resumption of hand gripper exercises with the right hand (the blood draw arm) on 2025-01-25

On Saturday 2025-01-25, I resumed hand gripper exercises with my right
hand. I had resumed the left hand the previous day, so this completed
the resumption of hand gripper exercises.

### Resumption of strength exercises (dead hang and pull-ups) on 2025-01-26

On Sunday 2025-01-26, I resumed strength exercises (dead hang and
pull-ups). This begins a new 3-day cycle, with the next day for dumb
bells and push-ups and the third day for rest from strength exercises.
