# 2025 sleep tracker

This document does not include details of my sleep time, waking-up
time, and sleep duration on a daily basis (I am starting to keep those
details in private logs starting 2024-10-11).

Rather, this document focuses on notable cases, particularly:

* Cases where I slept less than 7 hours or more than 10 hours (as
  measured in the time between when I went to bed and the time I woke
  up, rather than actual sleep time); for cases where I slept between
  9 and 10 hours, I may optionally record but will skip recording if
  this is during winter where temperatures are generally lower and
  there is often a need for additional sleep

* Cases where I had a particularly fitful or interrupted sleep

* Cases where I felt very sleepy and lethargic before my
  1-hour-notice-to-sleep time, outside of known cases of timezone
  adjustment (within the expected timeframe for such adjustment)

* Cases where I went to sleep less than 3 hours after finishing my
  last meal

* Optionally, cases where I went to bed more than 30 minute after the
  target time by which I need to get into bed (though I may not always
  record such cases)

* Optionally, cases where I made a multi-day effort to adjust my sleep
  cycle towards sleeping earlier or towards sleeping later, usually in
  response to weather changes, upcoming events that need me to get up
  early or stay up late, or timezone adjustments

## 2025-01-22 to 2025-01-23: 2:30 AM to 8:41 AM

This was an interesting situation. I break it down into three parts:

* Trigger and background factors for sleeping late
* Trigger and background facors for waking up early (i.e., without completing 7 hours)

### Trigger and background factors for sleeping late

I did soaking of lentils and was on track to have finished the
recording of said soaking at around 12:40 AM. My plan was to get into
bed a few minutes after that and then go to sleep within about 10
minutes of getting into bed. All in all, if things had gone according
to plan, I would have gone to sleep by 1 AM.

However, when I was running make commands on the repo, I ran into
unexpected issues. Diagnosing these issues ended up taking a while. At
this point, it was a judgment call. Nothing here was truly urgent, but
I did not want to go to sleep with this issue unresolved, so I
continued working on it until finally resolving it and taking followup
documentation steps. This was definitely a choice; I could have chosen
to go to sleep and tackle this the next day, at the cost of a slight
stress of unresolved stuff (I already have many unresolved threads,
but this one felt like it was a higher degree of urgency than the rest
because it gets to the integrity of my setup).

I was finished shortly before 2 AM, but then saw an incoming pull
request from a colleague, so spent a little time on it. Then I did my
final wrap-up by around 2:20 AM. Finally, I headed into bed and my
time of going to sleep was 2:30 AM.

#### Background factors that led to the tech issue

The background factor was that I was doing a bunch of work-related
updates and (perhaps unwisely) also decided to make equivalent
personal updates that ended up having unintended effects on my
personal setup. The exact thing was hard to predict, but I could have
been more proactive in terms of thinking of unexpected implications of
updates, and tested earlier in the day. I also knew (from a colleague)
that this specific issue can happen at some point as a result of
updates, so I had it in the back of my mind, but didn't think it would
happen to me now.

### Trigger and background factors for waking up early (relative to sleep time)

The trigger for waking up early was strong bowel pressure. Normally, I
wake up without strong bowel pressure and the develop bowel pressue
after a few minutes of being seated. However, in this case, my bowel
pressure was strong enough that I felt I need to get up to get ready
for a bowel movement.

Some of the background factors involved in the waking-up time were:

* I had been moving my waking up time to earlier over the past few
  days, in preparation for [blood tests the previous
  day](2025-01-22-blood-tests.md). So, I was primed to naturally wake
  up around this time, though my actual waking-up time was a bit early
  even considering that.

* I needed to be up by about an hour later than the time I woke up,
  for a work meeting. Although I still had time, I had primed my body
  to "be up sooner" than my full sleep cycle would require.

* I did finish my meal yesterday relatively early (8:07 PM) which
  would be consistent with this waking-up time. The early meal was a
  result of the general shifting of my schedule to earlier, as well as
  other aspects of the way yesterday's schedule worked after the blood
  tests.

* It was a warmer early morning indoors than the past few days. For
  instance, yesterday, the temperature was about 53F shortly after I
  woke up yesterday (temperature was recorded at 9:03 AM). In
  contrast, today the indoor temperature was about 58F at around 8:34
  AM, I few minutes before I officially woke up.

* Because of sleeping late, I ended up doing a second urination at
  2:21 AM before going to sleep. As a result, My "mid-sleep" urination
  happened late at 8:28 AM (normally it happens between 6 AM and 7
  AM). So when I got back from mid-sleep urination, in light of it
  being late and warm and just an hour to waking up, I ended up
  getting up just a few minutes later.

### Update on the next night's sleep

Going from 2025-01-23 to 2025-01-24, I had a little extra sleep that
probably made up somewhat for the reduced sleep on this night. I went
to sleep at 1:21 AM and woke up at 10:49 AM (my first alarm had been
set for 10:45 AM, and I was semi-awake when it triggered; if it hadn't
been for the alarm, I would likely have stayed in bed about 10-15
minutes more). This is about 9.5 hours of sleep, which likely makes up
a large portion of the reduced sleep.

## 2025-01-27 to 2025-01-28: 3:42 AM to 11:39 AM, and following days

This was a case where I somewhat deliberately stayed up late because I
really wanted to finish some travel planning work that I had not been
able to get enough of a continuous stretch of time for during the day
(due to things being busy with work and a heavy cyclic personal
chores load). The work stretched a little longer than ideal, but it
was within my range of expectations. I also did this knowing that I
did not have any obligation to wake up early the next day.

I went to sleep around 3:42 AM and updated my alarms to wake me up at
11:30 AM and 11:45 AM. My sleep pattern seemed close to normal, just
shifted a few hours. I was semi-awake at the time of the first alarm
at 11:30 AM, and got out of bed at 11:39 AM.

For comparison, these days, I typically go to sleep some time between
12:30 AM and 1:30 AM (and almost always between 12 AM and 2 AM) and
wake up some time between 9 AM and 11 AM.

Overall, the duration of sleep was close to typical (almost 8
hours). The quality was also typical, maybe a bit better because there
was better temperature minimum alignment with the environment.

One concern with this late-shifted sleep is missing out on some of the
timing-specific early phases of sleep (where the circadian rhythm is
based on typical sleep time rather than when I actually sleep) so I
shouldn't sleep much later than my usual time too often. Of course,
this wouldn't be a concern if I always slept this late, but that's not
an option due to the other concern below.

The other concern is social obligations, including meetings and alerts
related to the day job as well as things happening in the physical
environment (house and building repairs), some of which may not be
announced in advance. There is a general expectation of being awake
after 9 AM or at least by 10 AM.

The conclusion is that while this is fine to do once in a while, my
goal should be to pull back to a normal sleep schedule, skipping daily
activities on the next day if necessary to achieve that.

### Next few days

It took me a few days to return to a normal-ish cycle.

* 2025-01-28 to 2025-01-29: 2:39 AM to 11:06 AM. The bottleneck in
  this case was a mix of potatoes prep for second meal taking a long
  time, and doing some work stuff that had continuity benefits
  (causing a delay in starting potatoes prep). I also made a point of
  maintaining usual gaps and not skipping exercise; if I were more
  particular about getting back to a regular sleep cycle sooner, I
  would have shortened gaps, skipped exercise, or deferred the work
  item with continuity benefits.

* 2025-01-29 to 2025-01-30: 1:58 AM to 9:46 AM. The bottleneck was
  delays in having my first meal, which were again due to running into
  some work stuff that needed continuous time early in my day. I
  finished my first meal at 5:19 PM. However, I shortened the
  inter-meal gap and started my second meal at 8:46 PM, which allowed
  me to still go to sleep earlier than the previous day. I ended up
  waking with the alarm (set for 9:45 AM) due to a work meeting at
  10:30 AM.

* 2025-01-30 to 2025-01-31: 1 AM to 10:28 AM. The early sleep time
  marks my return to normalcy. The time of waking up, though late, was
  not constrained by any work meetings or other obligations, and the
  long sleep duration reflects the cold weather. Overall, I feel like
  I am back on track sleep-wise, so this incident is closed.

## 2025-02-06: interrupted sleep, failed bowel movement

In the recent past, it's been very cold in the mornings, and that has
meant waking up late. For instance, going from Tuesday 2025-02-04 to
Wednesday 2025-02-05, I went to sleep at 1:51 AM and woke up at 11:21
AM, to an indoor temperature of 55 degrees Fahrenheit. When I went to
urinate at 7:55 AM mid-sleep, the indoor temperature was 51 degrees
Fahrenheit.

I needed to wake up by around 9:45 AM on Thursday 2025-02-06 for a
work meeting at 10:30 AM. In order to achieve this after waking up
late on Wednesday, I skipped exercise. I ended up going to sleep at
1:29 AM and set alarms for 9:45 AM and 10 AM, which would give me
about 8 hours 15 minutes to my first alarm time. While not ideal, this
amount of sleep is generally (in normal weather) sufficient for me to
perform okay. Falling asleep took a little longer than usual but not by
much (maybe about 10 to 15 minutes more than usual?).

However, an alert went off at 9:16 AM, waking me up mid-dream. After
that, I stayed in bed for a bit, but knowing that I would need to wake
up shortly anyway, I didn't go back fully to sleep, and I ended up
getting out of bed and formally waking up at 9:30 AM. The indoor
temperature I recorded at 9:50 AM was 56 degrees Fahrenheit.

While I would normally develop a strong bowel movement urge within 20
to 40 minutes after waking up, I hadn''t developed any clear urge by
10:07 AM when I went for bowel movement to try it before the
meeting. I returned at 10:28 AM from an unsuccessful bowel movement. I
urinated quite a bit as part of the bowel movement. I blame
insufficient sleep and the acute interruption of sleep by the alert;
although on paper my sleep duration of 8 hour 1 minute is fine, it''s
too little in the context of winter.

### Actions taken for the future

I changed the "business hours" for some of the alerting services I am
on to start at 10 AM for the time being, while setting a reminder to
move them back to 9 AM after a few weeks.

I made a few updates to the [best practices around
sleep](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-sleep.md), adjusting
thresholds for cold winter days. See
[here](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/commit/1a7f4242543d42d1185ac16839d9cecbfd8fdd57).

### Recovery the next day (Friday 2025-02-07)

Unfortunately, I wasn't able to sleep extra the next day (Friday
2025-02-07), because the strong bowel pressure worked to wake me up. I
went to sleep at 2:03 AM, got up mid-sleep to urinate at 8:46 AM, and
then formally woke up at 9:29 AM, so I got a little under 7.5 hours of
sleep. On the plus side, the indoor temperature was higher, so I
didn't have that much of a need to sleep in.

I did have a larger bowel movement and got the sense of having caught
up after yesterday's failed bowel movement.

Overall, I felt fine and not too sleep-deprived, but perhaps not as
fully refreshed as I might have with some extra sleep.

I also had a watery flatulence when I went jogging, causing me to turn
around. The flatulence was at around 12:58 PM.

## 2025-02-11 night onward: shifted sleep cycle due to staying up late for some work stuff

On 2025-02-11 going into 2025-02-12, I had to stay up late for
time-sensitive work stuff that ended up going into an exception
case. I ended up going to sleep at 3:29 AM, and had to skip some
pre-sleep activities, like night-time bath, flossing and rinsing,
emptying out the prepped rice, and cleaning the rice pot. I did make a point of brushing my teeth.

I got up to urinate at 8:20 AM on 2025-02-12, checked some stuff with
the work situation, and went back into bed shortly. I stayed in bed
through the alarms set for 11:30 AM and 11:45 AM, and finally woke up
at 11:53 AM.

I skipped exercise to focus on the work situation. The situation
finally got under control around 7:30 PM. I had a (mostly non-work)
meeting with work colleagues at 8 PM that went on till 11 PM, and as a
result my second meal was significantly delayed (I had it 11:35 PM to
12:07 AM). I finally went to sleep at 3:36 AM, a similar time as
yesterday, albeit without having to skip any steps unlike yesterday's
crash sleep.

On 2025-02-13, I got up to urinate at 9:49 AM, then went back to
sleep. I finally woke up at 11:54 AM, for a total sleep duration of 8
hours 18 minutes, minus about 4 minutes for the urination trip in
between. As the work situation was more under control, I skipped most
exercises in order to shift my schedule back. I did end up finishing
my second meal at 9:08 PM, which would have allowed me to go to sleep
around 1 AM. However, I ended up catching up on small work items for a
while and finally went to sleep at 2:36 AM. Still an hour earlier than
the last two days, so progress.

On 2025-02-14, I went to urinate at 10:01 AM, then went back to bed. I
finally woke up at 11:49 AM, for a total sleep duration of 9 hours 13
minutes (minus about 6 minutes for the urination in between and
associated other activities at the time). I went to sleep at 1:35 AM,
which was an hour earlier than the previous day.

On 2025-02-15, I got up to urinate at 8:35 AM, while the indoor
temperature was 52 degrees Fahrenheit. I went back to sleep. My alarm
went off at 11:30 AM and I finally woke up at 11:35 AM, for a total
sleep duration of 10 hours, minus 5 minutes for the urination
trip. The indoor temperature at this point was 58 degrees
Fahrenheit. Given that I woke up this late, and given that I had a
bunch of things to do during the day, I went to sleep at 2:52 AM.

On 2025-02-16 I got up to urinate at 9:02 AM, when the indoor
temperature was 57 degrees Fahrenheit. I went back to sleep, and
properly woke up at 11:51 AM after getting through alarms at 11:30 AM
and 11:45 AM, for a total sleep duration of 8 h ours 59 minutes, minus
6 minutes for the urination trip. I went to sleep at 1:29 AM, staying
awake for less than 14 hours (and therefore having a short day with
less work done than usual).

On 2025-02-17, I got up to urinate at 7:32 AM and then got up briefly
around 8:25 AM. I finally woke up at 11:37 AM after getting through an
alarm at 11:30 AM, for a total sleep duration of 10 hours 8 minutes,
minus 14 minutes for my two in-between waking-up periods.

As of 2025-02-17 early afternoon, my guess is that it's one of these
factors:

* My "sleep need" in this weather is about 9 hours, so the two days I
  slept for just 8 hours (about 3:30 to 11:30) resulted in a sleep
  backlog of about 2 hours, which I made up for with the two days of
  sleeping 10 hours, so about 9 hours should suffice in the future.

* As a result of those two late nights, my "waking-up time" has been
  programmed to about 11:30 AM (and maybe even later if I didn't have
  the alarms) so even if I sleep before 2:30 AM I just end up sleeping
  more.

I went to sleep at 1:32 AM.

I did mid-sleep urination at 4:54 AM. I woke up at 9:32 AM after
alarms at 9:15 AM and 9:30 AM, for a planned meeting at 10 AM (that
ultimately got cancelled). Although a little bit underslept, I stayed
awake and I went for a bowel movement at 10:44 AM, suggesting that my
sleep had been adequate.

Since I had a lot of things to do (partly due to short periods of
staying awake in the past few days) I ended up being able to go to
sleep only at 2:57 AM; the temperature at this time was 62 degrees
Fahrenheit. I woke up mid-sleep to urinate at 9:02 AM. The temperature
at this time was 59 degrees Fahrenheit.I then went back to bed, got
through alarms at 11 AM and 11:15 AM, and finally woke up at 11:23 AM;
the temperature at this time was 60 degrees Fahrenheitx. This
particular night was warmer than usual, with the temperature staying
at or above 59 degrees Fahrenheit.

This wraps up the incident as far as I am concerned. Overall, my
assessment is as follows:

* I need about 8 to 9 hours of sleep depending on the minimum
  temperature value. When it's 59, about 8.5 hours is fine. When it
  goes down to 56-57, 9 hours is needed. When it goes down even
  further, even more hours are needed.

* Based on the temperature minimum pattern, waking up some time 10:30
  AM or later is ideal. But I can manage 9:30 AM if needed for a
  meeting, as long as I don't have a sleep backlog and try to get at
  least 8 hours of sleep (ideally more).

## Sleep cycle adjustment from 2025-02-22 onward in light of temperature changes

Around Saturday 2025-02-22, I decided to adjust my sleep cycle to
earlier, in light of temperature changes that make it easier for me to
wake up earlier. The temperature changes themselves are relatively
small, but significant as they are around the threshold. Specifically,
the minimum indoor temperature achieved between 8 AM and 10 AM
increased from around 57-59 degrees Fahrenheit to about 60-61 degrees
Fahrenheit. At that latter temperature, my internal
resistance/difficulty getting out of bed is significantly lower.

On Saturday 2025-02-22, I skipped jogging and strength exercises
specifically to shorten my day so that I could sleep a couple hours
earlier than I normally would, while still doing approximately as much
in terms of other stuff, and maintaining the usual gaps between meals
and between meals and sleep. This worked; I ended up going to sleep at
11:37 PM, two hours earlier than the previous day (1:53 AM).

On Sunday 2025-02-23, I got up to urinate mid-sleep at 5:45 AM, then
went back to bed, and then I woke up at 9:49 AM. This was about ten
hours of sleep, helping me catch up on my sleep backlog while still
waking up a little earlier than usual (though not as early as I'd like
to).

I then had a fairly normal day on Sunday. I ended up getting delayed
at the end, and went to sleep at 12:39 AM.

It was relatively warm/hot on the morning of Monday 2025-02-24, and after
getting up to urinate at 5:24 AM, I didn't fully fall back to sleep. I
ended up waking up at 7:29 AM. As I wasn't used to waking up this
early, I didn't initially have enough bowel pressure. I went for bowel
movement at 9:45 AM with very little pressure, but still had a normal
bowel movement.

On Monday night, I went to sleep at 12:06 AM, which was now a kind of
new normal. I also made sure to urinate right before going to bed, to
reduce the chances of needing mid-sleep urination. I set my alarms for
8:15 AM and 8:30 AM for a meeting at 9 AM.

On the morning of Tuesday 2025-02-25, I did not have mid-sleep
urination. I woke up at 7:54 AM, and went for bowel movement at 8:28
AM, which represents a typical gap between waking up and bowel
movement.

On Tuesday night, I went to sleep at 11:51 PM.

On the morning of Wednesday 2025-02-26, I did not have mid-sleep
urination. I woke up around 7:13 AM, compared to alarm times of 7:30
AM and 7:45 AM, in preparation for a morning meeting at 8:30 AM.

I believe that this completes my adjustment to sleeping earlier and
waking up earlier. I likely need to make further adjustments soon in
light of the daylight saving switch, but for now, this seems good
enough and aligned with current weather patterns.

## Sleep cycle adjustment effort 2025-03-11 onward in order to be more aligned with the daylight saving change

On 2025-03-11, I decided to make a concerted effort to adjust my sleep
cycle to earlier to be more aligned with the daylight saving change (I
estimated my sleep cycle was okay for the situation before daylight
saving, but not after).

For this, I skipped jogging on 2025-03-11, a move that would help me
move my first meal to 1.5 hours earlier than where it would otherwise
be. The effect of this bubbled through to sleep time, which was 12:43
AM, 1.5 hours earlier than my previous day's sleep time.

I got up to urinate on 2025-03-12 at 6:58 AM. At this time, there was
high humidity. Per normal, I closed my window and went back to bed,
hoping to wake up in about 2 hours. However, due to the humidity, it
was very stuffy with the window closed, so I opened the window at 7:21
AM. I wasn't really able to fall back asleep due to the humidity and
the not-too-hot-not-too-cold temperature, and I ultimately got up at
8:06 AM.

However, because of the low quality of the final portion of my sleep,
and perhaps because of the significant adjustment in time from the
previous day, I did not feel bowel movement pressure for a while. I
finally went for bowel movement at 10:06 AM, despite not feeling much
pressure, but I was still able to have a full normal bowel movement.

I had a normal morning on 2025-03-12 with a full load of exercise. I
felt lethargic in the afternoon after my meal, likely as a result of
poor sleep near the end. However, the lethargy was manageable and I
was able to continue working at a slow pace. After my second meal, my
energy level returned to normal for that time of day and continued
working.  Over the day, the temperature dropped from 61 degrees
Fahrenheit to 60 degrees Fahrenheit (where it stayed most of the day)
and then to 59 degrees Fahrenheit in the evening. This was driven by
it being overcast and rainy all day, with very little variation in
outdoor temperature.

I was getting into bed at 12:40 AM, but then got an alert
that I spent some time on, which delayed me by about 15 minutes. I
finally went to sleep at 1:17 AM.

It was quite cold in the morning on 2025-03-13 (indoor temperature of
around 57 degrees Fahrenheit) and I ended up delaying getting out of
bed for my mid-sleep urination at 8:46 AM. Since I had a work meeting
at 10:30 AM, I decided to just mark this as my time of waking up.

Unfortunately, I didn't get enough bowel pressure and my attempted
bowel movement on 2025-03-13 failed.

## Additional sleep needs after COVID-19 vaccine

See [2025-03-21 Pfizer COVID vaccine updated booster dose section on
sleep quality and
quantity](2025-03-21-pfizer-covid-vaccine-updated-booster-dose.md#sleep-quality-and-quantity).
