# 2025-07-08: insect bite

## The bite

On Tuesday 2025-07-08, as I was walking to Trader Joe's, I experienced
a sharp pain on my lower right leg, right around the sock line. Very
quickly, I realized it was because of an insect, and I shook it off --
it fell to the ground and writhed and didn't attack me again. As I was
not too far from home, I went back home to take followup care steps. I
made sporadic "aa" sounds but otherwise the itching and pain were
manageable.

The insect was something in the broad family of bee-like insects, but
I don't know the exact kind of insect. I didn't prioritize looking at
it closely, and I don't have practice in identifying and
differentiating insects. My guess, based on the fact that no stinger
was left behind, is that it was a wasp. [This Reddit
thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/pfmgn0/beeswasps_on_campus/)
and other Googling suggests that the yellowjacket is a common wasp in
Berkeley that tends to attack humans and food, and it's so identified
with Berkeley that it's even the mascot of Berkeley High School. So a
yellowjacket is a distinct possibility. But I lack any direct
evidence.

## Getting back home

After getting back home, I verified that there was no visible open cut
and there didn't appear to be any stinger in the area. I initially
applied vaseline, then looked through the online care
instructions. Based on the instructions:

* I washed the area with soap and water once (ideally I should have
  done this before the first round of vaseline application).

* I wrapped that area of my right leg in a cold paper towel and pulled
  my sock on top of the wrapping towel to hold it in place. Then I
  spread my leg out horizontally for about 10 minutes with that
  configuration.

After finishing both of these steps, I checked the area. While I still
felt the itch, I did not see any clear redness, only a little bit of
depression in the skin. The itching/pain was manageable, so I decided
to proceed with my Trader Joe's trip.

## Further observations and care steps

In addition to the itching/pain in the area, I also felt spasms
further up in my right leg, as if the body was having doubts about
sending blood to the area, but these spasms were brief and overall I
appeared to have enough energy to make a Trader Joe's trip (which is
about 2.5 to 3 miles walking plus time standing in store, so it's
sufficiently nontrivial).

I applied vaseline a couple more times to the area. While outdoors, I
made sure to cover the area by raising my sock a little bit, so that
this already-sensitive area did not get subjected to further insect
bites or debris.
