# Human Benchmark chimp test exercise (with history)

Exercise link: https://humanbenchmark.com/tests/chimp

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Functional relevance

This exercise is an interesting example of one where different kinds
of memory can be used in conjunction to memorize different parts. It
is therefore not just a test of memory but also of the ability to use
multiple memory systems together.

It is also an exercise where I have essentially unlimited time before
starting in order to view, encode, and store the pattern, unlike many
of the other exercises where the time available to encode is a
limiting factor.

Through practice of this exercise, I hope to improve:

* My ability to remember visual sequences over a larger grid than in
  sequence memory.

* My ability to remember long numerical sequences with unlimited time
  to encode.

* My ability to correctly tranform the stored information into
  actionable steps.

### The goal is to get a chimp test score average of over 20, while still finishing the game reasonably fast

My current sense is that a score average over 20 will be a point where
the time to play will be more of a bottleneck. Roughly, at 20, my
guess is I'll have to memorize the zigzag pattern from 1 to 5 and the
number sequences from 6 to 20.

## Current protocol and status as of 2024-11-17

My goal is to play the exercise about 2 to 3 times a week, generally
when I have at least 10 minutes to spare.

What times should I choose? Generally, before or after strength
exercises on a day where I have enough time flexibility.

## Background on the exercise

### Exercise description

Exercise link: https://humanbenchmark.com/tests/chimp

Description from the website:

> This is a test of working memory, made famous by a study that found
> that chimpanzees consistently outperform humans on this task.

> In the study, the chimps consistently outperformed humans, and some
> chimps were able to remember 9 digits over 90% of the time.

> This test is a variant of that concept, that gets increasingly
> difficult every turn, starting at 4 digits, and adding one every
> turn. If you pass a level, the number increases. If you fail, you
> get a strike. Three strikes and the test is over.

A [YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsXP8qeFF6A) of the
chimp vs human experiment is linked.

### Performance distribution

The modal value is 9, and the distribution looks close to symmetric
around the modal value, with 7 and 8 on the left and 10 and 11 on the
right have significant weight. Scores of 4 to 6 on the left and scores
of 12 to 20 on the right have nontrivial weight.

A score of 15 is around the 96th percentile.

## My strategy

My strategy is to memorize the visual zigzag pattern for the first few
digits. I can easily memorize a visual zigzag pattern up to about 5 or
6, after which it gets hard.

Beyond that, what I do is to memorize the numbers in a row major form
-- essentially memorize a numerical sequence with punctiation (for the
newline changes). Since I have already covered up to 5 or 6, I can
start from beyond that up to the biggest number. It seems like I can
memorize numbers in a row major form relatively easily up to about 10
numbers, and with some effort up to 12-13 numbers.

Once I have committed both of these to memory, I execute the visual
zigzag, then retrieve the stored sequence and use it to figure out the
rest of the sequence. This can get both easier and harder as I get
further through, because the squares disappear so I have to mentally
transform the stored sequence to account for the disappearances.

## Performance history

* 2024-10-15: 11.5 points moving average, placing me at the 77.5th
  percentile. I've played this only four times, with scores of 10, 12,
  13, and 11 respectively. I probably need to play it more to get a
  clear picture of where I stand and then to improve it.

  Retrospective note: At this point in time, I was only doing the
  visual zigzag, not the numerical sequence memorization. I can
  reliably do the visual zigzag only up to about 6, so the rest of my
  score was driven by fuzzy recollection of the remainder of the
  sequence.

* 2024-11-17: 15.2 points moving average, placing me at the 96.3th
  percentile, with the three most recent scores being 16, 16, and
  17. The 17 was actually a "throw" as I was getting tired and had
  lost 2 out of 3 lives already, but I likely would not have
  progressed much (maybe 1 more level).

* 2025-01-16: 16.6 points moving average, placing me at the 97.47th
  percentile. Not much has changed qualitatively since the last
  update on 2024-11-17.

* 2025-02-18: 17.2 points moving average, placing me at the 98.12th
  percentile. Not much has changed qualitatively since the last update
  on 2025-01-16; I've just gotten a little bit better and shed the
  older, lower scores from the moving average.

* 2025-05-21: I haven't played since 2025-02-18.
