# Human Benchmark sequence memory exercise with history

Exercise link: https://humanbenchmark.com/tests/sequence

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Functional relevance

The exercise does a good job of mimicking situations where information
is coming in at a not-too-fast rate but is building up and I need to
keep the cumulative sequentially ordered picture of all the
information in my head.

Through practice of the exercise, I hope to improve:

* My abiility to control and modulate my attention. As discussed in
  the [My strategy](#my-strategy) section, the key strategy is to use
  different parts of the game for different cognitive activities,
  including using some parts to get rest. Being able to modulate my
  attention to engage in the most beneficial parts at each stage
  requires focus and cognitive discipline. I find the same sort of
  ability to modulate attention to be very important for other tasks,
  where different steps of the task require different levels and
  different kinds of attention.

* My ability to harness my various kinds of memory, particularly
  short-term memory.

* My ability to come up with locally sensible strategies for attention
  modulation (I think I might already have achieved this at this point
  so there may not be much marginal value here).

### The goal is to verify a sequence memory exercise score of over 30

Through a combination of improvement in focus and better strategy (and
maybe physical improvements such as increased omega-3
supplementation?), I've increased my average score over time to
30+. At this point, my constraint is fatigue and time expenditure -- I
can literally feel my brain hurt as I get into the high 30s, as I do
sometimes. My goal is to maintain this level, by playing sequence
memory once every four weeks.

Time taken on the game grows quadratically with level, so improving
further may not be feasible time-wise unless I reduce my frequency of
play further, but taking frequency below once a week makes it harder
to maintain. So, in practice, aiming for over 30 (while still going as
far as I can in each play) is my current strategy.

## Current protocol and status as of 2025-01-19

My goal is to play the exercise for about one sitting every four weeks,
with 1-2 plays per sitting. I should start the exercise when I have at
least 25 minutes to spare.

From 2024-10-17 to 2024-11-10, the protocol was to do 1-2 plays
weekly, but given the time expenditure, and the fact that I generally
do consistently well, I reduced the frequency to once every two weeks
on 2024-11-10. I reduced the frequency further to once every four
weeks on 2025-01-19, in light of continued good performance (and in
fact somewhat improving performance).

What times should I choose? Generally, a weekend day when I am *not*
doing strength exercises (as that generally means I am spending less
time on physical exercise and will have correspondingly more time to
spend on sequence memory). This is ideal to do before going for
exercise or after returning from exercise, depending on time
availability.

## Background on the exercise

### Exercise description

Exercise link: https://humanbenchmark.com/tests/sequence

Description from the website:

> About the test

> Memorize the sequence of buttons that light up, then press them in order.

> Every time you finish the pattern, it gets longer.

> Make a mistake, and the test is over.

More details:

* The buttons are a 3 X 3, so the total number of buttons is 9. I can
  memorize the sequence either visually or by encoding as a sequence
  of digits.

* Adjacent digits are always different, but there seems to be no other
  pattern. Overall, there are 9 * 8^n sequences of length n.

* Within a given run of the game, each button has a specific sound,
  but the button <-> sound mapping seems to vary between runs. So it's
  only for long sequences with repeat buttons that the sound memory
  helps.

### Performance distribution

The modal scores are 8 and 9, and the median score is about 10.

A score of 15 is at about the 90th percentile.

A score of 30 is at around the 99th percentile.

### Comparable standard cognitive measures

The formal term for the kind of memory this tests is "visual
sequential memory"; however, this differs from another version where
the entire sequence is presented at once; this is a version where the
sequence is built up one character at a time. There's another exercise
on Human Benchmark, called number memory, for that. While there is
research on the standard distribution for number memory (7 plus/minus
2) I don't know of any standard cognitive measure associated with
visual sequential memory.

## My strategy

Adapted from [here](https://github.com/vipulnaik/working-drafts/blob/master/reddit/my-sequence-memory-strategy.md)

### Chunking

I do the obvious thing of chunking the sequence; I use chunk sizes of
four so I remember sets of four adjacent digits (the final chunk can
have 1 to 4 digits based on the parity of the level). I mostly use
numerical encoding in my head (using the keypad encoding for the 3 X
3), with the visual movements stored as a backup method.

### When watching the sequence unfold (once the sequence has gotten long enough)

I have roughly three different strategies depending on where in the sequence I am:

* The early part, that has been committed to memory pretty well: When
  the early part is playing, I rest my eyes and brain, so that it gets
  much-needed rest and doesn't spend energy unnecessarily. I might
  just watch it peripherally.

* The middle part, that is largely committed to memory but can benefit
  from active recall: For this part, I actively try to recall it as it
  is playing, and if there are any errors in my recollection that's
  feedback for me to strengthen/reiterate those parts in my head.

* The end, which is new or almost-new: For the end, what I do is
  repeat those last few digits in my head right after they play, a few
  times, so that they're committed to my working memory even though
  they haven't really been fully organized in there.

### When clicking the sequence, I make sure to go moderately slow

It's important to go slow when clicking. In particular:

* As the sequence gets longer and longer, there's more risk of
  accidentally pressing the wrong square due to a temporary memory
  confusion or just a misclick. Going slow protects somewhat against
  this. If the early and middle parts of the sequence are well-encoded
  in my memory, going slow should not be a problem.

* Also, when I am clicking the sequence myself, there is no time
  pressure (unlike when it's being shown to me) which means I have
  time to not just click the sequence, but also reinforce it in my own
  memory. So I try to use this time well to strengthen the parts that
  I had trouble recalling, without time pressure.

## Performance history

* 2024-05-16: 15.4 points moving average, placing me at the 90.9th
  percentile. Total of 19 plays, with a modal of around 17-19, and a
  max of 22. I have had a fair amount of practice with this test
  before logging in and creating an account; however, on the flip
  side, a few runs of the test, particularly the lower-scoring ones,
  were done in distracted settings.

* 2024-09-21: 17.2 points moving average, placing me at the 94.9th
  percentile. The score values range from 10 to 20, but with a few
  data points below 10 and a few above 20. My highest recorded score
  seems to be 29. My normal good score is in the 16-20 range.
  
* 2024-10-15: 20.4 points moving average, placing me at the 97.6th
  percentile. I generally score in the 17-30 range (which is where I
  land when not distracted and without making a careless error), but
  occasionally score in the 10-16 range when i make a careless error
  or get distracted.

* 2024-10-16: 32.8 points moving average. A big jump from the previous
  day, this was driven by the development of the strategy documented
  in [My strategy](#my-strategy). The three most recent scores were
  42, 36, and 39.

* 2024-11-10: 33.6 points moving average. The trend remains similar to
  2024-10-16. One thing worth noting is that for some of the games, I
  deliberately failed the game after getting a high enough score due
  to the game taking a lot of time that I didn't have to spare. So I
  could potentially have scored a little higher in those cases had I
  had the time and energy.

* 2025-01-16: 38.6 points moving average, placing me at the 99.82th
  percentile. The trend remains similar to before, and I continue to
  in some cases deliberately fail games after getting a high enough
  score.

* 2025-05-21: 37.4 points moving average, placing me at the 99.85th
  percentile. I haven't played the game much, largely due to its
  extensive time demands and because I've essentially cracked the code
  for it. There are no qualitative changes since last time.
