# Best practices around dental cleaning appointments

## Tally check

See [best practices around medical
appointments](best-practices-around-medical-appointments.md) for
general principles informing these best practices.

The main things specific to vaccine appointments are local strain at
the site of administration, which is the arm muscle, and therefore
also increased strain in the arm and neck muscles.

Of the principles listed in the document, the following are
inapplicable and hence omitted:

* (local IM pre / weather) The appointment is booked far enough in
  advance that I don't have clarity on the weather conditions. With
  that said, the current cadence (April and October) is decent for
  Berkeley weather.

* (local IM post / weather check) The 72-hour cancellation notice
  means that I can't do a 2-day weather check to influence my
  appointment.

* (regional IM pre / busyness) The appointment is booked far enough in
advance that I don't have clarity on my level of busyness.

* (regional IM pre / travel + medical) The appointment is booked too
  far in advance for this to factor in, but if travel and medical
  plans come up, I would factor those in and reschedule the
  appointment.

* (regional IM pre / cyclic personal chores load) ) The appointment is
  booked far enough in advance that I don't have clarity on my level
  of cyclic personal chores load.

* (regional IM pre / weather) The appointment is booked far enough in
  advance that I don't have clarity on the weather conditions. With
  that said, the current cadence (April and October) is decent for
  Berkeley weather.

* (preparation / accuracy of testing) Nothing special is needed beyond
  my ongoing usual dental hygiene (though we can think of some of the
  cautions around intense and hard foods as being sort-of-related, but
  they fall under risk reduction).

* (preparation / local rest) No particular local rest is needed prior
  to the appointment.

* (recovery / general energy conservation) No specific recovery is
  needed in a typical case.

## (local IM post / mark-on-calendar) Note the appointment date and time

(local IM pre / book in advance)
(local IM pre / free time)
(local IM pre / good time of day and day of week)

I generally book my dental cleaning appointment as part of the
previous dental cleaning appointment, and the usual interval is 27
weeks. My booking preference is Wednesday 1 PM.

Note the appointment date and time in the notes for the previous
appointment, and also put a calendar reminder. The start time for the
calendar reminder should be 2.5 hours before the appointment time and
the end time should be 3.5 hours after the appointment time (as the
appointments are for one hour, this means 2.5 hours after the end of
the appointment). Invite my work email address as well so that the
time range shows as blocked on the work calendar as well.

Also, check the two weeks before and after it just to make sure that I
don't have anything else that could create a conflict, such as travel,
other medical appointments, vaccines, or blood tests.

## Calendar reminders around the event

### Reminder to review maintenance windows, work calendar events, and Slack alert for work stuff (two weeks prior) -- put on work calendar

* (local IM post / on-call) Maintenance windows for work alerts where
  I'm primary: I can set these up when the appointment time is
  confirmed (usually six months prior) but should review two weeks
  prior as there may be changes to the list of affected
  services. Generally, set the maintenance window to start four hours
  prior to the start and end five hours after the start (so four hours
  after the end).

* (local IM post / on-call) Overrides for me for services where I
  rotate with others: I should probably handle these about two weeks
  prior to the appointment. Try for the override to be a full-day
  override; if a full day isn't possible, try covering at least two
  hours prior to the start and four hours after the end of the
  appointment.

* (local IM post / calendar) Work calendar events and Slack reminders:
  At the two-week-prior mark, I should clear out as much as possible,
  and then after that be particularly careful in the 2-3 days leading
  up to the appointment to keep that day clear.

### (preparation / risk reduction) Reminder to probe and be more careful around food consumption starting nine days before the appointment

While the full stoppage should only happen six days before the
appointment (see later) it's important to raise my level of caution
starting around nine days before the appointment. This elevated
caution means paying particular attention to the consumption of hot,
spicy, and acidic foods, and probing around to find any sensitive
areas in my mouth.

### (preparation / direct) Cancellation consideration for three business days before the appointment

There is a $50 charge for cancelling less than three business days
prior to the appointment, so I should set a calendar reminder to
consider whether to cancel or reschedule while I can still do so for
free. In particular, other related stuff such as vaccines, blood
tests, or travel plans may come up.

Some of the things to consider:

* Do I have any kind of injuries in my mouth that I expect to not
  represent chronic problems but rather temporary injuries?
  Rescheduling to a week later makes sense in such cases.

* Am I feeling unwell, for instance, digestive issues, minor cold,
  sniffling, etc.? In such cases, if there is an expected trajectory
  of getting better, delaying by 1-2 weeks, based on the expected
  trajectory, would be desirable.

* Look carefully in my calendar for the next few weeks and make sure
  there's nothing of concern in the two weeks ahead of the dental
  cleaning appointment.

### (local IM post / cyclic personal chores) Shopping reminder for two days prior to the appointment

Set up a reminder for a grocery shopping trip for the evening two days
before the dental cleaning appointment. It's good to have groceries
shopped for ahead of the appointment if possible.

### (preparation / risk reduction) Reminder to pause consumption of sauerkraut, walnuts, lemons, and spicy foods

* Reminder for two weeks prior to the appointment to stop using
  cayenne pepper in food preparation beyond this point, and pause
  consumption of any very intense / spicy foods that I don't usually
  consume every week.

* Reminder for eight days prior to the appointment to pause
  consumption of sauerkraut, kimchi, spicy foods, and lemons
  (basically all intense foods).

* Reminder for six days prior to the appointment to pause consumption
  of walnuts. This reduces the risk of injury in the cheek and
  gum area that might cause more pain during the dental cleaning
  process.

  Also, when consuming recently prepared hot food, I should make sure
  to mix it with cooler liquid foods so that the hottest temperature
  in my mouth isn't too high (this is a good practice in general but I
  should be particularly careful in the run-up to a dental cleaning
  appointment.

  Consume a vegan probiotic yogurt instead of sauerkraut over that
  time period.

* Reminder for two days after the appointment to resume consumption of
  walnuts and relax the strictures regarding hot food. The reason for
  the day of waiting is to make sure there are no mouth injuries
  created or exacerbated by the cleaning process or by some of the
  induced factors from it (such as increased sensitivity or dry
  mouth).

* Reminder for four days after the appointment to resume consumption
  of sauerkraut, with a note to delay if I'm experiencing drooling,
  mouth dryness, or excess salivation.

### (preparation / direct) Reminder to execute the dental self-exam checklist two days prior to the appointment

The reminder is to execute the [dental self-exam
checklist](../checklists/dental-self-exam-checklist.md) and log it as
usual in the [logs](../logs/dental-self-exam-checklist-log.md).

### (preparation / direct) Reminder to do normal face shaving 1 or 2 days prior to appointment and discard razor used

I don't want to be in a situation where I have a lot of face shaving
to do the morning of the appointment, so I should make sure not to
skip normal face shaving 1 or 2 days prior. Also, discard the razor when done so that I have a fresh razor for the shaving the morning of the appointment.

### (preparation / direct) Reminder to do thorough face shaving between 3 and 6 hours prior to the appointment (using a new razor)

Shave slowly and thoroughly. Be particularly thorough and careful in
the area above and below the lips.

### (preparation / general energy conservation) Reminder to skip exercise on the day of the appointment

This is to conserve time and energy for the appointment.

### (preparation / risk reduction) Reminder to keep fermentable food consumption to a minimum starting 24 hours prior to the appointment

In particular, this includes peas and lentils. Sauerkraut and kimchi I
have already stopped by this point. The goal is to reduce the risk of
flatulence and abdominal discomfort during the dental cleaning
process. My target threshold is more strict (I want to avoid abdominal
discomfort more completely) given the nature of the process and the
extended confinement.

### (preparation / direct) Packing / prep reminder for the night before the appointment

Anything I need to get ready for the dental cleaning should ideally be
handled the previous night, so that even if I'm in a rush I don't miss
doing it. This includes any planning for additional things I hope to
do in the trip after the appointment.

### (recovery / documentation and processing) Reminder to execute the dental self-exam checklist and document the dental cleaning on the evening of the cleaning

The reminder is to execute the [dental self-exam
checklist](../checklists/dental-self-exam-checklist.md) and log it as
usual in the [logs](../logs/dental-self-exam-checklist-log.md), then
also document the dental cleaning event itself.

If I am time-constrained, I should priorize documentation of the
dental cleaning itself. If I don't even have time to fully document
the dental cleaning, I should note key points to myself to be fleshed
out later. The dental self-exam checklist execution can be deferred by
up to one week.

### (recovery / local rest + reduced capacity + increased injury risk) Reminder to drink plenty of water and keep my talking load low for the two days after the appointment (to minimize and better address the risk of excess salivation)

I should closely monitor my saliva levels for the two days after the
appointment.

Drinking plenty of water helps address the risk of dry mouth.

Keeping my talking load low may help reduce excess salivation and also
reduce the inconvenience imposed by excess salivation.

### Reminder to set reminders for the next dental cleaning appointment

Set a reminder for the evening of the dental cleaning appointment to
set calendar reminders for the next dental cleaning appointment
following this doc.

### (recovery / local rest + reduced capacity + increased injury risk) Reminder to check for head and neck soreness the day after the appointment and skip strength exercises / hand gripper exercises if there is soreness

Sometimes, the ergonomics of the dental cleaning appointment may cause
or exacerbate head and neck soreness. Although mild, this can be
exacerbated by strength exercises and hand gripper exercises. Check
the day after the appointment and consider skipping these exercises in
case of observed soreness.

## Things to keep in mind during the appointment

* Make sure I know the signal to use with the hygienist to communicate
  if I have pain or need the cleaning to be stopped or paused.

* Don't keep the mouth open too wide for too long. In particular,
  close it for brief intervals in between when the hygienist is not
  working on the mouth. Keeping the mouth open for too long can
  trigger excess salivation the next day.
