# Best practices around exertion and stimulation

In many cases, I've experienced problems as a result of high levels of
exertion and stimulation, and in at least some of those cases, I could
have avoided or reduced those levels while still achieving the goals I
am interested in.

This document provides guidance on best practices regarding limits to
adhere to, even if I feel like I can do more.

It complements the [best practices around
sleep](best-practices-around-sleep.md).

## Heart rate as a measure of exertion and stimulation

While not necessary under ordinary stimuli when I am otherwise
healthy, the heart rate can be useful as a measure of my exertion and
stimulation as well as my recovery when subject to unusual stimuli or
when my baseline level of health is bad. I should target heart rates
that are consistent with those seen in my [pulse oximeter
readings](../sql/pulse_oximeter_readings.sql). Specifically, if the
lower end of my heart rate is above 60 bpm, that is suggestive of
either excessive exertion/stimulation from which I have not recovered
yet, or recent food consumption (within the past 2 hours).

I can measure the heart rate with a pulse oximeter, blood pressure
machine, or by taking a pulse with a stethoscope or my finger.

## Walking/jogging: limit adjusted exertion level measured via MEWs

### MEW calculation

If I jog x miles and walk y miles, my total mile equivalents walked
(MEW) are to be calculated as 2x + y.

### Limits (simple version)

With this calculation, the rules are as follows:

* Limit MEWs to 4.5-5.5 miles for every intermeal / pre-meal /
  post-meal period. In other words, any total MEWs over 5.5 miles
  should have a meal in between.

* Limit daily MEWs to 7-8 miles.

### How to decide between the lower and upper end of the range for the limit

Generally, use these factors to determine whether to stick to the lower
or upper end of the range (4.5 vs 5.5 or 7 vs 8):

* Do I have an otherwise demanding day cognitively or emotionally?
* Is the temperature decent? 15-20 degrees Celsius ambient
  temperatures are ideal and support higher limits. The farther the
  temperature from this range, the more I should go toward the lower
  limit.

### Typical daily cycle fits limits easily

Generally, I do one jogging/walking trip that is 2 miles total
(outside of very cold periods this is in the morning before any
meals). The proportion of jogging to walking can vary, but the highest
MEWs I can get from this is 4 miles, below the 4.5 miles lower value
for the limit.

I may also go for shopping trips. These can vary from 1 to 3 miles
depending on where exactly I go. Even at the high end of 3 miles,
these also fall below the 4.5-5.5 mile level.

Moreover, the total of a fully jogged 2 miles (4 MEWs) and a walking
trip of 3 miles (3 MEWs) is 7 miles, at the lower end of the range of
suggested limits.

### I should skip or reduce jogging on days when I anticipate more walking later in the day

In some cases, I may do longer walking trips for work, bureaucracy, or
pleasure. Either skipping jogging or jogging a shorter distance makes
sense so that I can stay within 7-8 total MEWs.

### This rules out the possibility of jogging and then going for a 3-mile shopping trip before my first meal

And that's a good thing, because that is what kicked off the
[2024-07-18
incident](2024-07-18-excessive-morning-activity-and-abdominal-pain-in-the-afternoon.md).

### If I do have to break the rules ...

If I need to exceed these MEWs, try to follow these practices:

* Try to take a break/rest at every 3 MEWs or less, of at least 30
  minutes. Make sure to drink water. If it's hot, make sure to take a
  break in the shade.

### Limits (more complex version)

The following is a more complex calculation of limits, that also assigns MEWs to other activities.

Some of these other activities included:

* Masked seating = 1 MEW/hour (think of being in an airport)

* Standing in a home situation, with light movement (washing dishes,
  cleaning, etc.) = 0.5 MEWs/hour. Home situations offer the
  flexibility of taking breaks if tired, as well as more freedom in
  terms of posture and movement direction.

* Unmasked standing in a constrained outdoor situation = 1
  MEW/hour. Examples here include standing in line, or standing in a
  "standup"-like work discussion. Here, I have less flexibility to
  move around as I please, and can't take breaks from standing.

* Masked standing in a constrained outdoor situation = 1.5
  MEWs/hour. This includes, for instance, standing in line at an
  airport or grocery store.

* Talking (lecture/presentation) = 1 MEW/hour. For group meetings
  where I am taking only some percentage of what I would talk in a
  lecture/presentation, I should adjust downward accordingly.

Based on this additional information, I have the following limits:

* 6 MEWs for every pre-meal / between meals / after all meals period

* 10 MEWs for the whole day

### Reworked example for a tyical day with the complex limits

Here's a bit of a reworked example for a typical day. Let's say that
in a day, I have these activities:

* 2 miles of jogging+walking (worst-case all 2 miles being jogged): total 4 MEWs

* About 2 hours standing in a home situation with light movement
  (washing dishes, house stuff, etc.): 1 MEW

* 30 minutes of talking (about 50% in a 1-hour virtual meeting): 0.5
  MEWs

* Trip for grocery shopping: 3 miles walking, plus 15 minutes in store
  (let's say the line is quite long) wearing a mask: 3.375 MEWs

The total is 8.875 MEWs, which is comfortably below the limit of 10
MEWs. Moerover, as long as we don't do the first and last one in the
same period, we should be fine in terms of overall exertion within
each period.

### Worked example of a flight

In contrast, let's say I am taking a domestic flight that is 2 hours
long. Let's say these are the estimates:

* 3 hours standing with mask including 1 hour each in the journey to
  and from, and 1 hour in the airport: 4.5 MEWs

* 3 hours being seated with mask including 2 hours in the flight and 1
  hour in the airport: 3 MEWs

* About 1 mile total of walking (combining journeys to and from): 1 MEW

As we can see, this alone totals to 8.5 MEWs. As it is normal to spend
1-1.5 MEWs in normal daily activity (prior to departure or after
arrival) this means that the flight + associated activity alone is
enough to use up my MEWs.

That means that days where I have flights are days where the flight
and associated travel alone exhausts my whole-day MEWs. Moreover,
since I (likely) won't have a meal in between, I definitely go over
the between-meal MEWs by a huge margin! So, I need to keep all
additional MEWs to a minimum as much as possible. In fact, given the
potential for things to go wrong and end up using even more MEWs, it
is best to be well-rested and conserve MEWs. Which brings us to the
next topic.

### MEWs across days

In some cases (such as travel, urgent things that need to be done,
etc.) I might have a day where my MEW expenditure is above the
threshold of 10. If I can anticipate this in advance, I may be able to
adjust both the preceding and following days; if it happens suddenly,
I may still be able to adjust the following days. Here is some general
guidance:

* If I am undergoing an unusual situation such as travel, where even
  the ordinary "everything goes well" case involves an expenditure
  over 8 MEWs, I should skip exercise and target a total of less than
  5 MEWs the previous day.

* If I end up spending over 10 MEWs on any given day, I should target
  for the next day to be sufficiently low in MEWs so that the average
  of the two days is still less than 9 MEWs. If possible, I should aim
  for fewer than 5 MEWs the next day (and even lower based on my level
  of fatigue), and skip all discretionary expenditure of MEWs such as
  exercise. However, if traveling to a new location, there may be
  things to address in the first few days so there may be
  non-discretionary tasks that I can't avoid.

### Timing of MEWs

My aim should be to spend at most 0.5 MEWs/hour at these times:

* For 1 hour after intense cardio and strength exercise

* For 1 hour after meal consumption

* Starting 1 hour before the 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time

Generally, this means no nontrivial outside trips during that
time. However, the 0.5 MEWs/hour does allow for extended standing for
post-meal cleanup work including washing dishes.

## Sun and heat exposure

These are the limits:

* Continuous outdoor exposure: 60 minutes when it is sunny, 40 minutes
  without sunglasses; can increase appropriately when it is cloudy or
  partially cloudy (break should be at least 5 minutes)

* Total outdoor exposure: 2 hours when it is sunny, 1 hour 20 minutes
  without sunglasses; can increase appropriately when it is cloudy or
  partially cloudy

### Typical daily cycle fits limits easily

* Jogging/walking is generally about 25-35 minutes; sometimes it's
  sunny when jogging (but not always).

* Shopping trips are generally 5-40 minutes walking, then shopping (at
  least 5 minutes in the shop), then 5-40 minutes walking back. Some
  of them have multiple stops. Even if done when sunny, they still fit
  within the limits.

## Passive optional cognitive stimulation (POCS)

NOTE: These limits were updated 2024-12-10 in light of recent
data. See the history of the document on GitHub to see the previous
limits.

Passive optional cognitive stimulation (POCS) refers to cognitive
stimulation that is both passive (I am watching a video or listening
to an audio) and optional (I don't need to do this for any near-term
deadline or goal), while also stimulating me cognitively because the
material is challenging or semi-challenging. A lot of videos I watch
around health and medicine have this characteristic. On the other
hand, entertainment content doesn't count here, because the amount of
material I'm trying to retain from it is low.

* POCS limits:

  * 1 hour for continuous POCS

  * 2 hours soft limit for POCS per day -- only go over this if I feel
    very confident that I can handle more

  * 3 hours hard limit for POCS per day -- don't go over this even if I
    feel like I can handle more

* POCS on speaker (where I am listening to it while away from
  computer). Limits here are a little lower because listening to
  audio this way can be a bit strenuous and also cuts into my
  unwinding / processing / sorting time.

  * 45 minutes for continuous POCS on speaker

  * 1 hour soft limit for POCS on speaker per day

  * 1 hour 20 minutes for POCS per day -- don't go over this even if I
    feel like I can handle more

* Soft block POCS at these times; only override this if I am fairly
  eager and comfortable:

  * Until after I finish my morning exercise

  * Starting 1 hour prior to my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time and until
    I get into bed.

  Once I get into bed (getting ready to sleep), I can watch some POCS
  as I prepare for sleep (up to 15 minutes) if I still have quota for
  the day.

* No multiplexing of POCS with any required cognitive stimulation
  unless the latter is low risk, low or medium in open-endedness, and
  low in peak cognitive strength (see next section for more on the
  terminology). If I do need additional bits of stimulation when doing
  such work, use music or lighter videos/audios that are not
  cognitively challenging and where I am not trying to retain any of
  the information.

## Required cognitive stimulation

Roughly speaking, required cognitive stimulation covers cognitive
stimulation for day job, personal projects, personal finances,
personal chores stuff (like writing this document), the occasional
cognitive exercise using something like Human Benchmark, and meetings
of various sorts. In some cases, listening to challenging audio or
video falls under required cognitive stimulation if I am on a
relatively tight deadline to acquire the information in question.

### Axes of classification for required cognitive stimulation

* Degree of risk:

  * Low: Even if I mess something up, it won't matter (for instance,
    writing text/notes for myself, working with code or data that has
    a lot of checks and balances and feedback mechanisms that prevent
    errors).

  * Medium: If I mess something up, I may need to take corrective
    action but it should generally be quickly caught and quickly fixed
    (think 1 to 10 minutes).

  * High: Any mistakes here can have meaningful consequences; I either
    don't know how to address mistakes or the process I do know can
    take a long time or be otherwise unpleasant and uncertain.

* Degree of cognitive open-endedness:

  * Low: Mechanical work that basically involves following a template

  * Medium: Work that largely involves following a process but has
    some small open-ended puzzles

  * High: Work where there isn't a clear-cut process to follow

* Peak cognitive strength / focus needed:

  * Low: This includes relatively mechanical work but can also include
    flow-state ideation work that might be very open-ended.

  * Medium: I feel some need to "focus" and double-check
    things. Often, moderately complex code changes or restructuring of
    code or documents fits here.

  * High: I'm stretching the limits of one or more cognitive
    skills. For instance, Human Benchmark tends to need peak cognitive
    strength in at least one dimension as I get close to failure. Note
    that Human Benchmark is an example with low open-endedness but
    high peak cognitive strength.

### How I should think of timing required cognitive tasks based on the axes of classification

Risk is the most important dimension for timing cognitive
tasks. Essentially, I want to stick to low-risk tasks toward the end
of the day, starting 1 hour prior to my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep
time. Separately, I should ake sure to stay at low risk when timelines
are tight, so that I don't end up stressed about fixing a mistake.

Regarding cognitive open-endedness and peak cognitive strength, it's
generally a bad idea to pick tasks that are simultaneously high in
both in the 1 hour prior to my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time. However,
this is more of a judgment call thing. There are two related risks:

* The open-endedness increases the risk of being hooked / not
  achieving closure by the time I go to sleep, or delaying my sleep to
  achieve closure.

* The peak cognitive strength can raise the extent of overdrive I go
  into, which gets in the way of getting into a calm state by the time
  of going to sleep.

Generally, things that are open-ended, but where the peak cognitive
strength is low (e.g., flow-state ideation) *and* I feel comfortable
wrapping up in the middle to continue the next day, are fine to do in
the hour prior to my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time. Also, things with
high peak cognitive strength, but that are very well-contained, such
as Human Benchmark tests, are also fine to do.

### Implication for execution of night checklist

It may be a good idea to do one pass of execution of my night
checklist an hour before my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time, and then
another right before my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time. The advantage of
the first execution is that it helps me clear out any tricky items
that need further investigation early on (if they are low or medium in
risk and have a reasonable profile of open-endedness and peak
cognitive strength) or set up plans to defer investigation to tomorrow
(if not). The final pass of checking at the 1-hour-notice-to-sleep
time is unlikely to surface much new stuff, so the risk of delaying my
sleep time is reduced.

## Audio stimulation

The optional cognitive stimulation above already places some limits on audio.

In addition, limit the use of music and non-required audio through the
day. In particular:

* No music or other non-required audio until I have completed my
  morning exercise (and ideally for at least 30 minutes afterward or
  until I am back to a normal heart rate), with the exception of music
  specifically tied to exercises such as humming exercises

* No music or other non-required audio for at least one hour prior to
  my 1-hour-notice-to-sleep time

* Try to limit music and non-required audio to at most 50% of the
  remaining computer time outside of meals and meal prep. This is
  harder to measure accurately. But for instance, when playing a song
  on repeat, consider waiting about the same length as the duration of
  song before hitting the replay button.
