# Best practices around exercise adjustment during hectic times

This document describes some of the best practices I follow around
exercise adjustment when times are hectic. This is not about
situations where 1 or 2 days are hectic, leading me to skip exercise;
it's more about situations lasting more than 1 week where I am not
able to follow my usual exercise routine. The purpose of this document
is to help me prioritize what exercises to do and how to make time for
them in such times. Thinking through this in advance can be
particularly helpful because the hectic nature of the situation may
leave me little time and energy to strategize.

## Jogging

Jogging serves several functions, and has several costs.

On the positive side:

* Jogging takes care of my "cardio" with the attendant benefits. This
  effect is strongest for outdoor jogging, but at-home jogging also
  gives at least some of the benefits.

* Semi-related to the above, the calorie expenditure with jogging
  helps me take in enough calories to balance, and along with those
  calories I can get more protein and micronutrients. If I stop
  jogging entirely, the resultant appetite decrease means I need to be
  deliberate about making sure I get the protein and micronutrients.

* By jogging reasonably regularly, I stay conditioned and can continue
  jogging in the future. I expect it would take me a while to get
  deconditioned -- even after not jogging for two weeks as a result of
  travel and a common cold after that, I got back to normal volume in
  about three days (see notes 2025-06-19 to 2025-06-21 in the [2025
  exercise tracker](../events/2025/2025-exercise-tracker.md).

* Outdoor jogging is helpful for outdoor exposure, which can be good
  for my mood. Outside of shopping trips, this is my main outdoor
  exposure in normal times.

On the negative side, jogging incurs huge margins before and after,
which makes it challenging to schedule. For instance, I shouldn't jog
at least 2 and ideally at least 3 hours after a meal, and I shouldn't
eat at least 1 hour after finishing jogging. This makes it hard to fit
into a day where there are scheduling constreaints.

Here are a few thoughts:

* I should aim to not skip jogging for more than three consecutive
  days, unless the nature of what's keeping me busy is also leading me
  to walk a lot (which, though not equivalent to jogging, can be close
  enough). (As an example of the latter situation, when I went to
  Portland for a work trip, I would walk every day from my hotel to
  the office location, which was a significant amount of walking, so I
  felt okay not jogging for that period).

* If weather and scheduling permit, I should aim to do at least one
  outdoor trip every two days, walking at least two miles total across
  the two days. If I don't have additional time for jogging, but I
  have flexibility around timing my already-required shopping trips or
  other chores, I should try to arrange them in this way.

  If weather and scheduling don't permit going outdoors at all, I
  should at least look out of the window for a few minutes and maybe
  step outside into an open corridor area (such as going to do laundry
  in the building).

## Strength exercises

I do a wide array of strength exercises, including weight-lifting,
push-ups, dead hang, and pull-ups. I also do more locally specific
exercises including hand gripper exercises and neck strength
exercises.

This is one area where I am still in the "build" phase rather than the
"maintain" phase. Strength is also an area where deconditioning is
relatively quick, and reconditioning takes more time. This is
something I've noticed in particular with hand gripper exercises,
which I try to resume sooner than other exercises because of less
overall body energy expenditure. My hold times take a while to get
back to my previous peak.

For these reasons, when I am generally short on time to do exercises,
I should consider giving priority to strength exercises. A few tricks:

* If morning time is scarce, consider doing strength exercises at
  suitable times later in the day. This can particularly work for the
  locally specific exercises such as hand gripper exercises (neck
  strength exercises I anyway do at night). But it may also work for
  some of the other exercises such as dead hang and pull-ups.

* If a full workout (that can take 15 to 30 minutes) is not practical,
  consider doing smaller portions, though generally try to do a unit
  of at least 5 to 10 minutes to get the benefits of a full
  workload. For instance, instead of doing the full suite of
  weight-lifting and push-ups, just do dumb bells (which can be 10 to
  15 minutes) or just kettlebell + push-ups (which can be 10 minutes).

## Balance exercises and other niche exercises

I do several other exercises, such as balance exercises, breath holds,
humming with intermittent pauses, incentive spirometry, and more.

These are less important, partly because I am in the "maintain" phase
for many of them, and partly because deconditioning here takes months
rather than weeks. For balance exercises, I have generally been able
to pick up from where I left off even after a week or more of not
doing them. This may partly be because they are more neural than
locally muscular.

On the other hand, they are also easy to fit into small spaces of
time, and because (with the exception of breath holds) they are
relatively easy to do and not too tiring, I can fit them as long as I
have literal time.

Overall, when times are hectic and I am not able to do them in the
morning, I should just do them at natural times but without worrying
too much about it. For instance, sometimes I am waiting for filtered
water to be ready during rice prep. I can do balance exercises in that
time. Unlike strength exercises, many of the balance exercises also
don't involve touching things, so I can easily do them in between
cooking without having to wash my hands before or after.
