# Best practices around light

Light is a challenge both in general and in light of (no pun intended)
some specific issues I have with light.

NOTE: Notes are very rough.

## General role of light

### Circadian rhythm regulation

Light, along with heat and physical activity, plays an important role
in circadian rhythm regulation.

In general, getting light early in the morning helps with wakefulness
signals. Keeping light to a minimum at night helps build up
sleepiness. Light levels during the day (after about 2-3 hours of
waking up) don't really matter (cf. circadian dead zone).

The lux level of sunlight is way higher than indoor light

For the morning dose, indoor light may not be enough. Generally,
something like a few thousand lux on average (5,000 lux or more?), which can be
achieved by brief exposure to sunlight (tens of thousands of lux) or
continued exposure to bright indoor lighting (lower lux, but keep them
on for several hours).

For night-time, we want to stay within less than 2,000 lux (?). So
even indoor lighting could be too much.

### UV stuff

UV light helps with vitamin D synthesis for the skin, but can also
contribute to skin cancer and aging and eye damage. The level of this
light is again trivial when indoors with curtains drawn. Outdoors,
outside of noon hours or in tropical areas, the level of the light
isn't enough to be worried about. Wearing sunglasses and keeping skin
covered when going out at noon are probably good ideas. Check the UV
index in the weather forecast; <= 3 is totally fine.

### Evenness of lighting across space and time

The pupils adjust based on the level of ambient lighting; in dark
environments, the pupil dilates to allow more light, and in brighter
environments, the pupil contracts to let less light in.

When lighting is uneven across space (nearby areas have differing
brightness), this can present a challenge because there is no correct
setting for the pupil to aspire to in terms of light level. Similarly,
when lighting is uneven across time (blinking lights) this again
creates a challenge as the pupils take time to adjust their size.

### Contrast when reading stuff

When trying to read stuff, a decent degree of contrast is helpful for
reducing eye strain. For this reason, for instance, dark mode may be
preferable for some people. However, too much contrast can create
issues with the evenness of lighting problem (the pupils don't have a
right setting to deal with variability). So, dark mode with moderate
contrast but not excessive contrast is probably ideal.

## My specific issue: I seem to be more sensitive to bright and concentrated light sources (read: unevenness in lighting across space)

I have a problem with concentrated light sources that have heavy
contrast with the level of light around them. This includes the sun
(but it's anyway not good to look at the sun, because it is too
bright) and also artificial lights (light bulbs) as well as screens
(to a lesser extent).

The problem manifests through increased fatigue and irritability, but
the effect size tends to be mild over short durations. Generally, it
takes 45-90 minutes of continued exposure for me to start experiencing
noticeable fatigue.

I address these respectively as follows:

* Sun: Sunglasses during noon hours and sunny times; avoidance by
  staying in the shade and looking away from the sun at all times when
  outdoors; curtains when indoors

* Light bulbs: I generally keep them off when not needed (i.e., when
  working on computer)

* Screens: I use dark mode (moderate contrast), adaptive brightness
  (so screen is as dim as feasible hardware-wise and considering the
  brightness of the environment).

### Sun avoidance

I generally wear sunglasses when outdoors, except when going jogging
(as the sunglasses reduce vision which is important at higher
speeds). But I try to go jogging outside of peak noon hours.

In general, I try to stay on the shade side when walking or jogging,
to the extent feasible. I also try not to look at the sun. When the
sun is particularly bright, I look down, face away from the sun, or
(if directly facing the sun) put my hands in front of my forehead to
provide protection from the glare of the sun.

Indoors, I generally draw curtains to keep the sun out. Enough diffuse
sunlight still makes it through to support indoor work without the
need for artificial lights.

### Artificial lights

Where I am unusual is during night hours, when using light bulbs or
other concentrated sources of illumination. Generally speaking, being
in a place where I might end up having the light bulb in my direct or
peripheral vision tends to fatigue me. If the light is on in a nearby
room and is diffusing in without being concentrated in one spot,
that's fine with me.

For this reason, I generally keep the light off when at home at night
when working on my computer or when thinking about something where I
don't need to look at anything.

I do need to put the light on when eating, doing post-meal cleanup, or
doing other things that require the use of light.

In group settings in social situations, I am able to ramp up enough
sympathetic drive to keep the fatigue at bay (although communal areas
are in some cases better because they have a wider and more diffuse
system of lighting, they can also have really powerful concentrated
light sources sometimes). However, the fatigue does eventually come
back to me later.

### Screen coping: dark mode, adaptive brightness

For screens, I use three tools:

* Dark mode: Dark mode is helpful particularly in the context of low
  levels of ambient light, because with low ambient light, it's easier
  to read text in dark mode. Also, dark mode reduces the total
  effective brightness of the screen for a given brightness setting,
  making the screen less of a concentrated source of light.

* Adaptive brightness: The laptop screen brightness adapts to the
  ambient level of light. So, with the light bulbs off, it adjusts to
  a lower level of brightness. Unfortunately, sometimes the ambient
  level of light is so low that even the least bright setting of the
  screen is still too bright, making the screen a concentrated light
  source. (EDIT: On 2024-12-17, while investigating something similar
  for sound, I discovered that Macbooks allow for a more fine-grained
  control of brightness and sound volume (at 1/4 of the usual
  granularity) that I can avail by pressing alt+shift while adjusting
  the brightness or sound. This might be a useful option in the future
  in cases where the ambient light level is so low that even the
  lowest standard screen brightness is too much. If so, the next
  paragraph may be less applicable than when I wrote it.)

  Now, it's a bit of "lesser of two evils" -- putting an
  artificial light on may in some cases be the lesser evil because
  that concentrated light source, even though brighter, is still not
  something I am directly staring at. I think sometimes it does happen
  that I may have to put a light on as the lesser of two evils, but
  usually the ambient light is enough that keeping artificial lights
  off is still the best approach. (Another possibility is to put on a
  light in a nearby room or pull back curtains to let a little bit of
  light in).

* Warm colors: I have configured to use warm colors after 5 PM. I
  don't think this directly helps with my problems, but it is alleged
  to have other benefits. I'm not as convinced about warm colors as I
  am about dark mode and adaptive brightness, so I may end up
  reversing the decision.

## Situations of increased sensitivity

Normally, my level of sensitivity is not too high. It tends to be
higher in situations such as these:

* Sleep backlog (see [best practices around sleep](best-practices-around-sleep.md))

* Head/neck/shoulder tension which could be due to exercises (strength
  exercises, dead hang, and hand gripper exercises), extended carrying
  of heavy loads.

* Cognitive overload

* Sensory overload from other senses (such as listening for too long,
  getting a lot of unpleasant sounds such as phone calls, alarms, or
  alerts)

* Immune activation (fighting off an infection)

If I observe increased sensitivity, consider that one of the above may
be a contributor and try to address that cause. For instance, if I've
been listening to a lot of music or audio, consider taking a break
from music and audio, or least reducing the quantity radically, until
I feel better.
