# Best practices around DEXA scans

## Tally check

See [best practices around medical
appointments](best-practices-around-medical-appointments.md) for
general principles informing these best practices.

The main things specific to DEXA scans are the desire for accuracy of
testing.

Of the principles listed in the document, the following are
inapplicable and hence omitted:

* (local IM post / calendar) The scan will be on a weekend so work
  calendar stuff doesn't apply.

* (preparation / general energy conservation)
  (preparation / local rest)
  (preparation / risk reduction)
  The procedure is not expected to be fatiguing and so does not
  need energy conservation or local rest in advance. However, it's
  worth noting that I am anyway pausing exercise the prior day for
  accuracy of testing, so I expect to get some energy conservation
  from that even though that is not my direct intention.

* (preparation / risk reduction) There are no specific risks I am
  trying to reduce here.

* (recovery / general energy conservation)
  (recovery / local rest + reduced capacity + increased injury risk)
  I don't expect the procedure to be generally or locally fatiguing in
  non-obvious ways. Of course, if I do feel fatigued by the whole
  trip, I can skip exercise the next day but this will be a
  case-by-case determination rather than a general principle.
  

## (local IM pre / book in advance) Book the appointment

Unlike the case of blood tests, DEXA scans are directly booked with
the provider. The two providers in the San Francisco Bay Area are
[BodySpec](https://www.bodyspec.com/) and
[DexaFit](https://www.dexafit.com/). Based on cost and location
considerations, I'd probably pick BodySpec.

I should aim to book at least two days before my intended date of
going for the tests. Keep in mind the test location hours from around
7 AM to around 3:30 PM all days of week (Monday to Sunday).

(local IM pre / good time of day and day of week)

For day of week, preferably pick a weekend day as that means less
coordination effort with my day job. Saturday is likely better than
Sunday as it gives me an extra day for recovery and processing.

For time of day, consider that I will likely need to travel to San
Francisco for the appointment, which includes a BART trip and
additional walking (and maybe additional steps). This is unlike the
case of blood tests where it's just a brief walk. Therefore, aim for a
time that is at least 3.5 hours after my natural waking-up time, and
ideally somewhere between 4 hours and 5 hours.

(regional IM pre / travel + medical)

Try to book at a time when there is nothing of this sort in the
previous or next two weeks:

* Ill health of any sort

* Medical appointments such as eye care appointments, other tests, or
  dental cleaning appointments

* Intercity travel

* Unusually high-stress events

At the time of booking, I should carefully read the policy around
cancellation and rescheduling, so that I know what to do if things
come up and I can no longer make the appointment time.

Also:

* (local IM pre / free time) Choose a day and time where my personal
  and work calendar are free.

* (local IM pre / weather) Choose a day and time so that the risk of
  weather disruption is minimal.

Also consider:

* (regional IM pre / busyness) Busyness with day job and personal projects

* (regional IM pre / cyclic personal chores load) Load of cyclic
  personal chores (higher in the winter due to greater appetite
  leading to more cooking and food purchase effort)

* (regional IM pre / weather) Chances of rain over the time period;
  even if that particular day is clear of rain, rain in the days
  before and after reduces my scheduling flexibility for needed
  shopping around the period (higher in the winter).

## Calendar reminders

### (local IM post / mark-on-calendar) Reminder for the scan date

Since the test is likely to include at least some pieces that require
fasting, I should do the test in the morning, ideally after waking up,
bowel movement, morning tasks, and bath (and without eating).

Set a calendar reminder from 7 AM (or five hours before the
appointment time, whichever is earlier) to at least three hours after
the test time on the test date. Invite my work email address as well
so that the time is blocked on my work calendar.

I should budget to leave about 2 hours after waking up, arrive within
1 to 1.5 hours after leaving, spend 1 to 1.5 hours at the test
location, and return about 1 to 1.5 hours after leaving.

### ASAP after the appointment date and time are confirmed

* (local IM post / on-call) Maintenance windows for work alerts where
  I'm primary: I can set these up when the appointment time is
  confirmed. Generally, set the maintenance window to start two hours
  prior to the start and end five hours after the end.

* (local IM post / on-call) Overrides for me for services where I
  rotate with others: Try for the override to be a full-day override
  covering at least two hours prior to the start and four hours after
  the end of the appointment.

### (preparation / direct) Reminders to set alarms and sleep early starting three days before the test date

There should be three reminders to set alarm and sleep early, for each
of the three nights prior to the DEXA scan.

I should have accounted for my sleep cycle at the time of appointment
booking, but there may have been late nights in the interim period
which might have disrupted my sleep cycle.

So, I should start monitoring and adjusting my sleep cycle starting
three days before the test date.

* For the day of the DEXA scan, my alarms should be set to 2 hours 15
  minutes and 2 hours prior to my *departure time*, which translates
  to 3 hours 45 minutes and 3 hours 30 minutes prior to my appointment
  time.

* If these times are later than my usual alarm times, I can stick to
  my usual alarm times throughout.

* If they are earlier than my usual alarm times, they should generally
  not be more than 45 minutes earlier. I should adjust the alarm time
  in increments of 15 minutes starting the night of three days before.

* Three nights and two nights prior, my time of going to sleep should
  be max(8 hours, usual sleep duration) + 15 minutes prior to the
  first alarm time. The night prior, I should use max(8 hours, usual
  sleep duration) + 30 minutes.

* The closing-for-sleep time should be 1 hour prior to the target time
  for going to sleep.

### (preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminder to eat so that I finish about 13 to 16 hours prior to my expected scan time

Having food in my system can affect the quality of the scan (for
instance, it may show fake left/right differences if I have recently
eaten). So, aim to finish eating about 13 to 16 hours prior to my
expected scan time. Try to have a good bowel movement (as usual) the
day of, so that I have relatively clean insides.

### (local IM post / cyclic personal chores) Shopping reminder for two days prior to the appointment

It'll be good to get grocery shopping done so that I don't have to
scramble on or after the day of the appointment, particularly
considering that it's a bigger amount of travel to a more far-off
location, so it uses up more time and leaves less time for other
things.

### (local IM post / weather check) Weather check reminder for two days prior to the appointment

Set a weather check reminder for two days prior to the appointment.

### (preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminder to skip exercise starting the day prior to the DEXA scan

While it's recommended to skip exercise the day of the DEXA scan,
skipping exercise the prior day is not needed. But it may be safer to
skip anyway to conserve time and energy and build up a buffer of MEWs.

### (preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminder to pause supplements for two days prior to the DEXA scan

I should pause all supplements for two days prior to the DEXA scan. In
general, it is recommended to pause the consumption of calcium,
multivitamins, and various GI medicines (which I don't take) the day
prior to the DEXA scan. Skipping all supplements for two days seems
like a safe practice.

### (preparation / direct) Packing / prep reminder for the night before the DEXA scan

What printed or phone documents do I need to carry?

Make sure I have the right clothes for tomorrow.

Make sure I have the right stuff to empty my pockets into my backpack
(keys, wallet, etc. would need to be removed from my pockets during
the scan).

### (preparation / direct; recovery / documentation and processing) Make a document in `events/<year>` titled `<YYYY-MM-DD>-dexa-scan.md`

Follow the structure of previous documents of this sort. This is the
document that I will continue to update and expand upon over time,
with the bulk of the expansion happening after the DEXA scan.

## Day of the appointment

### (preparation / direct) Make sure to wear clothes without any metal (even zippers)

Clothes with metal can interfere with the integrity of DEXA scans.

### (preparation / direct) Make sure to drink enough water (if testing allows)

I may be out and about in the sun for a while, and then wait for a
while, so drink enough water before leaving.
