# Best practices around bowel incontinence

## Normal monitoring

### Identification

I don't do anything special around prevention of bowel incontinence
beyond my general practices around diet, exercise, and sleep, because
generally speaking the incidence is rare.

Larger cases of bowel incontinence, such as watery flatulence, are
generally things that I notice as they happen, so no special
monitoring effort is needed. On the other hand, minor streak leaks /
skid marks may escape my attention, as they may accompany normal
flatulence of the kind that usually doesn't leave skid marks.

The main thing I do is regularly monitor. This includes checking my
underwear before a bowel movement as well as checking it when changing
clothes (usually at night before a bath). These manual checks are
generally necessary to catch minor streak leaks and skid marks that
may occur during normal flatulence or at night.

### Immediate post-identification steps

* If feasible (for instance, if in a home environment with enough
  underwears), I switch my underwear and wash the stain so that it
  loosens up and mostly clears out prior to the underwear being added
  to laundry. This reduces the risk of fecal contamination of the rest
  of my clothes (generally, these stains are mild enough that even if
  I don't do this, they'll come off in the laundry, so the pre-washing
  is more to reduce fecal contamination of other clothes).

* I record the incident
  [here](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health-private/blob/master/sql/bowel_incontinence.sql),
  including information on whether it was watery flatulence or streak
  leak, and whether I think it happened shortly before a bowel
  movement (due to pressure buildup). For stuff discovered at night,
  it would not be before a bowel movement because I'd have checked in
  the prior bowel movement. For stuff discovered prior to the bowel
  movement, I need to exercise my judgment.

## Enhanced monitoring and prevention in case of frequent incontinence

Sometimes there is a period of days where I have increased incidents
of incontinence.

If this accompanies some other phenomenon (infection, diarrhea,
constipation, abdominal discomfort) I should address that other
phoenomenon with the added information and context.

This section focuses on enhanced monitoring practices I should adopt,
where feasible, regardless of the other phenomena at play.

### Check and maybe wipe more frequently

While I normally check before bowel movement and when changing clothes
prior to bath, in the case of multiple incidents over a week, I should
switch to a practice of additionally checking prior to each meal (this
is a natural checking point as I go for pre-meal urination). I should
also check after any observed flatulence even if the sensation feels
dry, if time permits.

Time and resources permitting, I should also wipe during the check
(dry wipe is fine if I'm okay doing it; if I also have [anal
irritation](best-practices-around-anal-irritation.md) I should do a
wet wipe and then dry it out.

These are the cases regarding staining:

* The underwear is clear and dry.

* There is a clear fecal stain present. In such a case, if feasible
  (for instance, at home with enough clean underwears) I should switch
  underwears and wash the stain.

* There is dry flaky dust that can be brushed off; there's no stain
  (flaky dust is not recorded in SQL).

* Usually seen right after flatulence, I see a bit of water (even
  though the flatulence didn't appear like a full-out watery
  flatulence, it was still a little watery and I only noticed this on
  examining the underwear). In this case I should make a point of
  checking after 30 minutes or more by which time the water would have
  cleared out; if it hasn't cleared out by then, set another reminder.

These are the cases regarding the result of wiping:

* Wiping is completely clear.

* I see some fecal matter on wiping. I should wipe again till things
  are clear.
