# Best practices around blood tests

This document focuses on the process of ordering and getting blood
tests, not around the decision process behind them. For the latter,
see [best practices around blood test
decisioning](best-practices-around-blood-test-decisioning.md).

## Tally check

See [best practices around medical
appointments](best-practices-around-medical-appointments.md) for
general principles informing these best practices.

The main things specific to blood tests are the desire for accuracy of
testing, whose prerequisites depend on the specific tests being
ordered, and the weakness that might entail from the removal of blood
from my arm.

Of the principles listed in the document, the following are
inapplicable and hence omitted:

* (preparation / local rest) The blood test does locally deplete my
  arm, but prior rest isn't needed; only care after the fact is
  needed.

* (preparation / risk reduction) There are no particular risks to
  reduce before the blood tests.

* (recovery / general energy conservation) I don't need to take
  specific steps for general energy recovery; I can use my own
  intuitions and decide to take a break if I need, but I don't need to
  deliberately take additional time.

## Order the tests and book the appointment

The process is generally two-phase: first, I order via a provider,
such as Own Your Labs, Marek Diagnostics, or Request A Test. They will
send the order to the blood draw company, which will be either LabCorp
or Quest Diagnostics. Here is how things work:

* For Request A Test -> Quest Diagnostics: The order appears on the
  Quest Diagnostics website, and after that I can book an appointment
  directly tied to the order, or do a walk-in with the order.

* For Marek Diagnostics -> LabCorp: At least the first time I did
  this, the order did not appear on the LabCorp website. The booking
  of the appointment is not tied to the order, but I must have a
  printout of the order when I go for the actual appointment so I can
  submit it and tie my appointment to the order.

(local IM pre / book in advance) I should aim to book at least two
days before my intended date of going for the tests (in practice, it
is often necessary to book at least 1 week in advance for Quest
Diagnostics and at least 2 weeks in advance for LabCorp for my
preferred appointment times). Keep in mind the test location hours
(usually Monday to Friday, opening around 7 AM or 8 AM, and staying
open till around 4 PM).

(local IM pre / good time of day and day of week)

(preparation / accuracy of testing)

Generally, blood tests will include at least one
test that requires fasting; the timing considerations are based on
that. In case there are requirements to *not* be fasting, work out the
right time for the blood test based on that. For time of day, some
time between 9:30 AM and 11:30 AM is best, with 10 AM to 11 AM being
ideal.

However, consider my general routine of meals and waking up and try to
pick a time that is at least 2.5 hours after my natural waking-up
time, and ideally somewhere between 3 and 4 hours.

(regional IM pre / travel + medical)

(preparation / accuracy of testing)

Try to book at a time when there is nothing of this sort in the
previous or next two weeks:

* Ill health of any sort

* Medical appointments such as eye care appointments, other tests, or
  dental cleaning appointments

* Intercity travel

* Unusually high-stress events

Also:

* (local IM pre / free time) Choose a day and time where my personal
  and work calendar are free.

* (local IM pre / good time of day and day of week) Choose a day and
  time where the chances of day job interference are minimal.

* (local IM pre / weather) Choose a day and time so that the risk of
  weather disruption is minimal.

Also consider:

* (regional IM pre / busyness) Busyness with day job and personal projects

* (regional IM pre / cyclic personal chores load) Load of cyclic
  personal chores (higher in the winter due to greater appetite
  leading to more cooking and food purchase effort)

* (regional IM pre / weather) Chances of rain over the time period;
  even if that particular day is clear of rain, rain in the days
  before and after reduces my scheduling flexibility for needed
  shopping around the period (higher in the winter).

## Calendar reminders

### Even before the appointment is confirmed

* (preparation / direct) Download the requisition form to my phone for
  offline access.

* (preparation / direct) Calendar reminder to print out two copies of the requisition form
  and sign one copy.

### (local IM post / mark-on-calendar) Reminder for the test date

Since the test is likely to include at least some pieces that require
fasting, I should do the test in the morning, ideally after waking up,
bowel movement, morning tasks, and bath (and without eating).

Set a calendar reminder from 7 AM to at least two hours after the test
time on the test date. Invite my work email address as well so that
the time is blocked on my work calendar.

I should budget to leave about 2 hours after waking up, which can be
cut down to 1 hour 45 minutes if reasonably careful.

I should aim to arrive 15 to 30 minutes after leaving (15 to 20
minutes for the Colby St / Regent St locations for LabCorp and Quest
Diagnostics respectively, 25 to 30 minutes for the San Pablo Ave
location).

More details are in a later section that spells out the reminders I
should set for myself regarding sleep times and alarm settings.

Since there's no fixed date, just an intended date, I can move this
around if things happen at work.

### ASAP after the appointment date and time are confirmed

* (local IM post / on-call) Maintenance windows for work alerts where
  I'm primary: I can set these up when the appointment time is
  confirmed. Generally, set the maintenance window to start two hours
  prior to the start and end five hours after the end.

* (local IM post / on-call) Overrides for me for services where I
  rotate with others: Try for the override to be a full-day override
  covering at least two hours prior to the start and four hours after
  the end of the appointment.

* (local IM post / calendar) Work calendar events and Slack
  reminders: I should clear out as much as possible, and then after
  that be particularly careful in the 2-3 days leading up to the
  appointment to keep that day clear.

### (preparation / general energy conservation; preparation / direct) Reminders to set alarms and sleep early starting three days before the test date

There should be three reminders to set alarm and sleep early, for each
of the three nights prior to the blood draw.

I should have accounted for my sleep cycle at the time of appointment
booking, but there may have been late nights in the interim period
which might have disrupted my sleep cycle.

So, I should start monitoring and adjusting my sleep cycle starting
three days before the test date.

* For the day of the blood tests, my alarms should be set to 2 hours
  and 1 hour 45 minute prior to my *departure time*, which translates
  to 2 hours 30 minutes and 2 hours 15 minutes prior to my appointment
  time assuming the Colby St location, and to 2 hours 45 minutes and 2
  hours 30 minutes prior to my appointment time assuming the San Pablo
  Ave location.

* If these times are later than my usual alarm times, I can stick to
  my usual alarm times throughout.

* If they are earlier than my usual alarm times, they should generally
  not be more than 45 minutes earlier. I should adjust the alarm time
  in increments of 15 minutes starting the night of three days before.

* Three nights and two nights prior, my time of going to sleep should
  be max(8 hours, usual sleep duration) + 15 minutes prior to the
  first alarm time. The night prior, I should use max(8 hours, usual
  sleep duration) + 30 minutes.

* The closing-for-sleep time should be 1 hour prior to the target time
  for going to sleep.

Worked example:

* Let's say my appointment is at 10:45 AM at Colby St, and my usual
  alarm times are 8:45 AM and 9 AM, and my average sleep duration is 8
  hours.

* I need to move the alarm times to 8:15 AM and 8:30 AM
  respectively. I should start this three nights earlier, moving them
  to 8:30 AM and 8:45 AM, and then two nights earlier, move them to
  8:15 AM and 8:30 AM. No adjustments are needed the night prior.

* For sleep times, I need to go to sleep by 12:15 AM three nights
  prior, by 12 AM two nights prior, and by 11:45 PM the night prior.

* This in turn means that my closing-for-sleep time needs to be 11:15
  PM three nights prior, 11 PM two nights prior, and 10:45 PM the
  night prior.

### (preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminder to eat so that I finish about 14 hours prior to my expected blood draw time

This will depend on the specific appointment
time, if any; if no appointment, use the estimated time of walk-in.

### (local IM post / cyclic personal chores) Shopping reminder for two days prior to the appointment

It'll be good to get grocery shopping done so that I don't have to
scramble on or after the day of the appointment. Carrying heavy
grocery bags can be a challenge after having blood draw in an arm.

### (local IM post / weather check) Weather check reminder for two days prior to the appointment

Set a weather check reminder for two days prior to the appointment.

### (preparation; general energy conservation; preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminders to skip exercise starting the day prior to the blood test

It is recommended to not do vigorous exercise for at least 24 hours
prior to a blood test, so skipping exercise the day prior to the blood
test should be fine. This is particularly relevant for hepatoocellular
injury markers such as ALT and AST.

### (recovery / local rest + reduced capacity + increased injury risk) Reminders to resume hand gripper exercises and strength exercise

NOTE: Jogging and breath holds can be resumed the next day after the
blood test if I'm feeling up to it. No calendar reminder is needed.

* Resume reminder for hand gripper exercises for the arm from which
  the blood wasn't drawn: Two days after the blood draw

* Resume reminder for hand gripper exercises for the arm from which
  blood was drawn: Three days after the blood draw

* Resume reminder for strength exercises: Four days after the blood draw

### (preparation / accuracy of testing) Reminders to pause supplements for two days prior to the blood test

**NOTE: If measuring B12, it is important to pause consumption of the
B complex supplement for at least five days, and ideally at least a
week, before the blood test (this is because the consumption of biotin
and folate, both of them present in the B complex supplement, can
interfere with B12 measurement). Even otherwise, it may make sense to
pause B complex supplements given that I appear to have had an adverse
reaction to them once.**

Recent consumption of supplements can distort blood test results,
particularly when the blood test is for the materials being
supplemented (the risk is highest for water-soluble vitamins). Pausing
supplement consumption starting two days prior to the blood draw gets
rid of the distortion.

Supplement consumption can be resumed in the meal I have immediately
after the blood test, or the next day.

### (preparation / direct) (Including printed requisition form and phone copy of requisition form) Packing / prep reminder for the night before the blood test

Since blood tests are relatively early in the morning, anything I need
to get ready for them should ideally be handled the previous night, so
that even if I'm in a rush I don't miss doing it. This includes any
planning for additional things I hope to do in the trip after the
blood test.

### (preparation / accuracy of testing; preparation / diet) Review diet in the context of the blood tests to see if any temporary dietary restrictions are needed

For most blood tests, no dietary restrictions are needed (other than
12-hour fasting). However, please review the blood test list and check
whether any dietary restrictions make sense.

### (preparation / direct; recovery / documentation and processing) Make a document in `events/<year>` titled `<YYYY-MM-DD>-blood-tests.md`

Follow the structure of previous documents of this sort. This is the
document that I will continue to update and expand upon over time,
with the bulk of the expansion happening after the blood tests.

## Day of the appointment

### (preparation / direct) Make sure to drink enough water (if testing allows)

Drinking enough water can help with the blood draw process, reduce my
hunger, and reduce the risk of dehydration from the journey for the
blood draw.

NOTE: If I am also doing a breath test, the breath test may require
not taking water for a certain amount of time prior to the test. So,
if the breath test is included, make sure to follow the instructions
after taking into account the expected amount of time to get to the
test location. If I end up getting to the test location sooner, figure
out the expected wait time and perhaps delay check-in for the breath
test if needed.
