# 2024 activity tracker

This continues with the spirit of my [2023 activity
tracker](2023-activity-tracker.md), recording my trips outside the
home. I exclude trips for jogging and running. I also exclude trips
for grocery purchases and picking up takeout from restaurants; you can
get a sense for those trips by looking in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday January 12

In the afternoon, I made a trip, mostly for my COVID-19 vaccine.

I first went to the Ashby BART to add money to my Clipper Card. This
wasn't urgent, but I had a few minutes before my COVID-19 vaccine
appointment at Walgreens, and I wanted to add more money to my Clipper
Card to get the item off my list prior to upcoming international
travel (BART cost for airport trip is high, and there may be other
travel needed in preparation for the trip).

I was done there at around 2:36 PM. From there, I went to the
Walgreens on Adeline Street, arriving at 2:45 PM. My process of
getting the COVID-19 vaccine is described in the [appointment section
of the doc on that
topic](2024-01-12-pfizer-covid-vaccine-updated-booster-dose.md#appointment-2024-01-12). After
I was done with the vaccine card update, I bought a few items from
Walgreens, checked out, and headed back home.

## Thursday January 18

In the evening, I made a trip to Walgreens, checking out a little
after 6 PM.

## Sunday January 21

In the afternoon, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley for some
purchases. I first stopped at the Target in downtown Berkeley, then
went to Berkeley Ace Hardware, then went to Trader Joe's; purchases at
Trader Joe's are recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday January 26

In the evening, I made a trip related to my trip preparation. After
being done with that, I did my usual food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Saturday January 27

In the later afternoon, I made a trip related to my trip
preparation. After being done with that, I purchased groceries from
Trader Joe's, as recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Saturday February 10

In the early afternoon, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley. I first
went to Citibank for some financial transactions. After that, I did my
usual food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Thursday February 15

In the afternoon, I made a trip for administrative stuff. I was out
from around 1:30 PM to around 2:30 PM.

## Friday February 16 to Sunday February 18

Over this period, I was on a flight from San Francisco to Bengaluru. I
arrived in Bengaluru on Sunday and then went over to stay at my
parents' place.

## Monday February 19

On this day, in the morning, I went for a brief administrative trip.

## Tuesday February 20

On this day, from the morning to the early afternoon, I went for a
lengthy administrative trip. The trip was to VFS Bengaluru (at Gopalan
Innovation Mall) for document drop-off for my US visa application.

## Wednesday February 21

In the afternoon (around 4 PM) I made a trip to a small toiletries
store nearby to buy a few toiletries.

## Sunday February 25

In the morning and early afternoon, I made a trip, along with my
parents, to meet relatives and then to the mall.

## Wednesday February 28

In the afternoon I made an administrative trip. The trip was to VFS
Bengaluru (at Gopalan Innovation Mall) for passport pickup (with
221(g)) for my US visa application.

## Thursday February 29

In the morning and early afternoon I made an administrative trip.

## Sunday March 3 and Monday March 4

On these two days, I was busy with a bureaucratic trip to Chennai. The
trip was for my US visa interview at the US consulate in Chennai. The
interview itself was a walkin 221(g) interview. I went for the
interview around 8:30 AM and was back a little after 10 AM.

## Monday March 11

During the afternoon, I went out for a bureaucratic task.

## Tuesday March 12

In the late morning / early afternoon, I went out with my parents for
lunch.

## Friday March 15 and Saturday March 16

Over this period, I flew back from Bengaluru to San Francisco.

## Monday March 18

In the afternoon, I went to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC Berkeley to
pick up a bunch of stuff. This was an order I had placed to replace
the stuff that I left behind in India -- with this one-time investment
I expect the load of stuff I have to carry back-and-forth to be
significantly less in the future.

Since there was a lot of stuff to pick up, I carried my suitcase
along, and indeed I needed to pack it 50-75% full for the return
journey, along with putting a few smaller items in my backpack.

As I did not want to dirty the suitcase wheels on the uneven city
sidewalks (I'm trying to restrict wheel use to smooth indoor surfaces
such as those at home or in airports), I carried the suitcase both
ways. This was not too difficult going to the place, because the
weight was only the weight of the suitcase. However, for the return
journey, the weight was quite a bit, and the process of coming home
was slow. For the return journey, I did need to put the suitcase down
for a few seconds a few times, so it did make contact with thecity
sidewalks, but I didn't make the wheels roll over the sidewalks.

When I got back home, and before I started unpacking,I weighed the
suitcase and got a weight of around 9.1-9.3 kg.

## Wednesday March 20

In the evening (starting a little after 4 PM) I went out for a
combination of a bureaucratic trip and food purchases. The
bureaucratic portion of the trip ended shortly after 6 PM. After that,
I did food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday March 22

In the morning I made a bureaucratic trip. The trip involved walking
about 45 minutes each way and about 15 minutes at the location.

Around 10 minutes into the return trip, I experienced mild shoulder
pain in my right shoulder. I was carrying my backpack on my shoulders
but the load on it was minimal. The shoulder pain continued in mild
form though it was alleviated by taking the backpack partly off my
right shoulder. The pain largely subsided after I got home and removed
my backpack.

## Wednesday March 27

From around noon to 5:45 PM, I made a trip to the WeWork at 1111
Broadway Street in Oakland to hang out with work colleagues. As part
of the trip, we ate out at Tay Ho Restaurant in Oakland, where I had a
vegan braised eggplant with tofu and mushroom.

## Thursday March 28

In the late afternoon / early evening, I went to the Amazon Hub Locker
for package pickup. I took my suitcase along; even though the total
amount of stuff wasn't a lot, there were a few larger items that would
be easier to carry in the suitcase rather than in my backpack or in
grocery bags.

Indeed, I filled the suitcase about 25-30%.

As I did not want to dirty the suitcase wheels on the uneven city
sidewalks (I'm trying to restrict wheel use to smooth indoor surfaces
such as those at home or in airports), I carried the suitcase both
ways. This was not too difficult going to the place; it was a little
harder during the return journey as the suitcase was heavier; however,
it was nowhere near as hard as for my Monday March 18 trip.

After I returned home, I immediately went out again with my backpack to
shop at Walgreens (I left the suitcase at home).

## Monday April 1

In the evening, I went to downtown Berkeley for shopping. I first went
to Target to buy batteries. I was there from around 6 PM to around
6:15 PM. After that, I did food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday April 2

At night, around 8 PM, I left for a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at
ASUC to pick up a package. After I was done, I went to the Walgreens
on Adeline Street to purchase toiletries.

## Wednesday April 3

In the early afternoon, I went for a dental cleaning appointment
recorded in detail [here](2024-04-03-dental-cleaning.md). After that,
I went to Berkeley Bowl to buy a few items, as recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday April 12

In the evening, I made a trip for shopping. I first stopped at Ace
Hardware, though I ended up not buying anything. I then went to Trader
Joe's, where I made a few purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql). On the way back, I
stopped at Walgreens to buy a few items.

## Sunday April 21

In the morning and early afternoon, I was out to attend an event.

## Tuesday April 23

In the evening, I went to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC to pick up a
few packages.

## Wednesday April 24

In the afternoon, I went to downtown Berkeley. I first went to
Citibank for some financial transactions. Then I went for a little
administrative task, after which I made my usual food purchases
recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Monday April 29

In the evening, I first went to the Milvia Urgent Care facility of
Sutter Health to see if I could be examined for my [abdominal
pain](2024-04-25-abdominal-pain.md). However, they had a long enough
queue of patients until their closing time, so I left with the
intention of returning on a later date. I then did my regular grocery
purchases at Trader Joe's as recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday April 30

In the afternoon, I first went to the Milvia Urgent Care facility of
Sutter Health to see if I could be examined for my [abdominal
pain](2024-04-25-abdominal-pain.md); details of the trip are
[here](2024-04-30-urgent-care-visit-and-tests.md). On the way back, I
stopped at Walgreens for a prescription pickup and at Berkeley Bowl to
get groceries; the latter is recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Sunday May 12

In the afternoon, I went to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC to pick up a
package. I stopped by at Berkeley Bowl on the way to buy some rice, as
recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday May 14

In the late morning, I went to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped at
Ace Hardware from where I purchased some drain cleaner. After that, I
went to Trader Joe's for my usual food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday May 24

In the afternoon, I made a trip to Berkeley Bowl (purchases recorded
in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql)) and then to the
nearby Walgreens. Later in the evening, I made a brief trip to
Walgreens to exchange an incorrectly purchased item, stopped by at
Citibank for financial transactions, then went to Trader Joe's for my
usual food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday May 28

In the evening, I went to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped by at the
downtown Berkeley BART to top up my Clipper Card balance. I then went
to Trader Joe's for my usual food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday May 31

Shortly after noon, I went to Berkeley Bowl for some grocery purchases
and then to the nearby Walgreens for some toiletry purchases. The
Berkeley Bowl purchases are recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

In the evening, I went for a bureaucratic trip and stopped at
Walgreens on the way back to buy a few toiletries.

## Monday June 3 to Friday June 7

From Monday June 3 to Friday June 7, I was in Portland for a
work-related trip. I don't plan to publicly document most trip
details, though I do plan to include most of the food purchases.

## Saturday June 8

In the evening, I went to Walgreens to buy bandages and then to Trader
Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Sunday June 9

In the evening, I went to Walgreens to buy bandages (to augment the
ones bought last time) and then to Trader Joe's for food purchases
recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Wednesday June 19

In the evening, I first went to Walgreens to buy bandages (to augment
my last two purchases) and then to Berkeley Bowl for food purchases
recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql). I then
went to the Amazon Hub Locker to pick up a package. The stuff was
pretty heavy to carry back, so it ended up being good strength
training as well.

## Tuesday June 25

In the evening, I went to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped at
Goodwill to try to donate some items, but their donations were closed
for the day. I then went to Citibank for some financial transactions.

## Wednesday June 26

In the evening, I went to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC Berkeley to
pick up some packages. The totality of the stuff was quite a bit, so I
carried a suitcase to the location and packed the stuff mostly in my
suitcase (with some in my backpack). The stuff was pretty heavy
particularly for the return journey, so this turned out to be good
strength exercise as well as aerobic exercise, partly making up for my
skipping jogging in the morning.

## Friday June 28

In the early afternoon, I went to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped
by at Goodwill and donated some items, finishing around 1:50 PM. I
then went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday July 5

In the morning, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC
Berkeley to pick up a few packages.

## Wednesday July 10

In the morning, I made a trip to Berkeley Bowl for food purchases
(recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql)) and then
to Walgreens for toiletries purchases.

Later in the morning, I made a trip to Citibank for financial
transactions, then went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday July 12

In the afternoon, I made a trip to Walgreens to get my Tdap booster
dose; see [here](2024-07-12-tdap-vaccine-booster-dose.md) for
details. After that, I did some shopping at Walgreens and then headed
back home.

## Saturday July 13

In the late morning, I went to Walgreens to buy toiletries.

## Sunday July 21

In the morning, I went to Berkeley Bowl and Walgreens. The Berkley
Bowl purchases are recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

In the evening, I made another trip to Walgreens to buy some bandages,
in light of my [recent injury](2024-07-21-finger-injuries.md).

## Saturday July 27

In the evening, I went to Berkeley Bowl and Walgreens. The Berkley
Bowl purchases are recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday August 2

In the afternoon, I met up with a couple of people for lunch at Kitava
near the 16th Street / Mission BART, where I had the vegan power
bowl. After lunch, we went to a coffee shop near Dolores Park, but I
didn't have anything there. I took BART both ways.

After getting down at Ashby BART, I made a trip to Berkeley Bowl for
food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Saturday August 3

In the morning, I made a trip to Citibank for financial transactions,
then went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Monday August 5

In the morning, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC
Berkeley to pick up a package.

## Thursday August 8

In the afternoon/evening, I made a trip to Berkeley Bowl and
Walgreens. The Berkeley Bowl food purchases are recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday August 9

In the morning, I made a trip for some tax-related administrative work
(copying/printing etc.) and also picked up a package from the Amazon
Hub Locker at ASUC Berkeley.

## Tuesday August 13

In the morning, I made a trip for some tax-related administrative work
(copying/printing etc.) and then stopped by at Berkeley Bowl for food
purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday August 16

I made two trips during the day to the post office at 3175 Adeline
Street to mail stuff out.

## Monday August 19

In the morning, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped at
Citibank for some financial transactions. I then went to Tader Joe's
for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Saturday August 24

In the afternoon, I made a trip to Walgreens to pick up the FoodMarble
Aire 2. I had documented the purchase decision process
[here](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/events/2024/2024-08-21-foodmarble-aire-2-purchase-decision-process.md).

## Friday August 30

In the afternoon, I met up with work colleagues for lunch at the
Cheese Board Pizzeria, though I didn't eat myself. We later walked
around and visited another place. After that, I went to Citibank,
Target, and FedEx to complete various chores.

## Tuesday September 3

I went to Quest Diagnostics at 2999 Regent Street for blood tests. See
[2024-09-03: blood tests](2024-09-03-blood-tests.md) for more
information.

## Wednesday September 11

I made a two-leg trip for some administrative work related to taxes
and then later made a trip to Amazon Hub Locker for package pickup.

## Monday September 16

I made a trip in the morning to the post office at 3175 Adeline Street
to drop off a piece of mail.

## Monday October 7

In the evening, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC for
package pickup. On the way back, I bought some stuff from Walgreens.

## Wednesday October 9

In the afternoon, I went for a dental cleaning appointment recorded in
detail [here](2024-10-09-dental-cleaning.md). After that, I stopped by
at Walgreens on the way back for some shopping.

## Friday October 11

In the afternoon, I made a trip to Citibank for financial transactions
(getting quarters for use in laundry). I then went to Trader Joe's for
food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday October 18

In the afternoon, I went to Walgreens to try to buy a 10 lb dumb bell,
but the dumb bell was not in stock. I then went to Berkeley Bowl for
food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday October 25

In the afternoon, I went to Walgreens for my flu shot, documented at
[2024-10-25 flu shot](2024-10-25-flu-shot.md), I bought a few items
from Walgreens after being done with the flu shot.

## Sunday October 27

In the afternoon, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC for
package pickup.

## Friday November 1

In the late afternoon / early evening, I made a trip to downtown
Berkeley. I first stopped at the USPS post office at 2000 Allston Way
to drop off my 23andMe saliva sample.

I then stopped at Citibank for financial transactions (getting
quarters to use for laundry).

I then went to Trader Joe's for
food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday November 5

In the afternoon, I made two back-to-back trips to Walgreens for
purchases.

## Monday November 11

In the afternoon/evening, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker to
pick up a package. On the way back, I stopped at Walgreens to do some
shopping.

## Friday November 15

In the afternoon/evening, I made an administrative trip. On the way
back, I stopped at Walgreens and bought a few items.

## Thursday November 21

In the afternoon/evening, I made a trip to Walgreens for some
purchases. After that, I went to Berkeley Bowl for food purchases
recorded in [food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Sunday November 24

In the evening, I made a trip to Sports Basement and purchased two 10
lb dumb bells there.

## Wednesday November 27

In the late afternoon / early evening, I made a trip to downtown
Berkeley. I first stopped at Target and bought AA batteries.

I then stopped at Citibank for financial transactions (getting
quarters to use for laundry).

I then went to Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Friday December 13

In the morning, I went to LabCorp for a blood draw, described
[here](2024-12-13-blood-tests.md).

After finishing the blood draw, I stopped at Walgreens on the way back
and did some shopping.

## Sunday December 22

In the evening, I made a trip to the Amazon Hub Locker at ASUC for
package pickup. I took my suitcase as there was a lot of stuff to pick
up. After getting back home and dumping the suitcase, I immediately
left for Berkeley Bowl for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql).

## Tuesday December 24

In the evening, I made a trip to Walgreens to purchase earwax removal
products. I also bought a couple of dish soap bottles as part of the
trip.

## Tuesday December 31

In the evening, I made a trip to downtown Berkeley. I first stopped at
Citibank to withdraw quarters to use as laundry coins. I then went to
Trader Joe's for food purchases recorded in
[food_purchases_2024.sql](../../sql/food_purchases_2024.sql). On the
way back, I made a short detour to check the donation hours for
the Goodwill in downtown Berkeley.
