# 2024-04-25: abdominal pain

Sections of this document:

* [The previous few days](#the-previous-few-days)
* [The day before (2024-04-24)](#the-day-before-2024-04-24)
* [The day of (2024-04-25)](#the-day-of-2024-04-25)
* [The next few days](#the-next-few-days)
* [Thermal comfort](#thermal-comfort)
* [Pain interpretation](#pain-interpretation)
* [Potential causes and aggravating factors](#potential-causes-and-aggravating-factors)

## The previous few days

### Four days prior (Sunday 2024-04-21): out for an event for a long time

On 2024-04-21, I was out for an event and ate outside food that is
somewhat different than my usual food. The experience also involved
waking up early and standing for a long time. Overall, the experience
fatigued me and the food may not have agreed with me, though other
than slight soreness in my threat, I didn't really experience
significant immediate symptoms related to the food.

Due to waking up early on the morning of 2024-04-21 (around 5:45 AM), I
wasn't able to have a regular bowel movement that day, but I did have
a regular bowel movement the next day, and on the whole I felt that I
had recovered by the next day.

ADDED 2024-05-06: I also remember that I was a little physically
twisted when I woke up around 5:45 AM, so there could have been some
sort of internal posture issue. This may connect to some of the pain I
experienced later.

### Two days prior (Tuesday 2024-04-23): Amazon package pickup

On 2024-04-23, I went for Amazon package pickup, which involved a
decent amount of walking with a heavy load. However, I did skip
jogging and strength exercises on this day, so I think on the whole my
exercise level was normal.

## Overnight sleep from Tuesday 2024-04-23 to Wednesday 2024-04-24

I also stayed up till pretty late, partly because of the additional
time with the Amazon package pickup trip, and partly because I spent
some time at night doing personal chores (password recall drill) after
a fragmented day, and I ended up going to sleep after 2 AM. However, I
didn't sleep in so I got up around 7:30 AM on Wednesday (2024-04-24)
morning, which means I had a bit of a sleep backlog.

Though I don't stay up this late very often, it's also not
super-unusual. In the past, though, I've slept in a bit later when
going to sleep late, and I didn't do so this time because I've formed
a habit of waking up early after my recent timezone adjustment from my
India trip. The net effect was that I had fewer hours of sleep than
usual going from Tuesday to Wednesday. In and of itself, I would not
consider this concerning, as I am usually able to catch up with slight
sleep backlogs the next day. I also had a normal bowel movement on the
morning of 2024-04-24, suggesting that the sleep had not caused any
immediately visible disruption to my digestive cycle.

## The day before (2024-04-24)

On 2024-04-24, I got takeout from Udupi Palace for my evening
meal. This was the same as my usual takeout, but the gap since the
previous time I had had the takeout was quite large (16 days) so my
body might have become unacclimated to it. But otherwise it was a
pretty normal takeout.

There were also some stressful events related to the house (that began
shortly prior to my Udupi Palace meal consumption). These were not
fully resolved by end of day but the plan was to resolve them the next
day. This plan succeeded.

I ended up going to sleep around 11:30 PM, which is a fairly typical
time to go to sleep. Without any sleep backlog, my natural waking-up
time would be somewhere between 7 AM and 8 AM. It's likely that with
my slight sleep backlog, my natural waking up time would have been
around 8:30 AM.

## The day of (2024-04-25)

### Before the pain (7:34 AM to 8:40 AM approximately)

On 2024-04-25, I was woken up around 7:34 AM by alerts. This is around
my natural waking-up time; however, in light of the fact that I had
underslept the previous night, I may have naturally slept in a little
longer.

After acking them, I went back to sleep and slept for about 10 minutes
more, till the approximate time that I would normally have woken up
(but, given my sleep backlog, I may actually have continued in bed for
a little longer). I got out of bed around 7:50 AM.

I went for a bowel movement around 8:40 AM, which is a little later
than usual (both in absolute terms and relative to my time of waking
up). Until then, I had not experienced any notable pain or discomfort.

### Onset of pain during bowel movement (8:40 AM to 9 AM approximately)

The pain started in my abdominal area (middle, neither left nor right)
during the process of the bowel movement some time shortly after 8:40
AM. The bowel movement was fairly incomplete but there was still some
movement.

In hindsight, one mistake I made at this stage was to strain myself to
try to do a bowel movement rather than just give up. This may have
been an aggravating factor for my pain.

### Return to computer and subsequent attempts to rest (9:10 AM to 9:50 AM approximately)

After finishing the partial bowel movement, I returned to my computer
and worked for a little while, but the pain was making it difficult
for me to concentrate. The seated posture also seemed painful.

At 9:30 AM, I lay down in bed, however, the lying down posture was
also difficult for me, so I sat up in bed, resting against the
wall. This posture didn't suit me either.

### Second attempted bowel movement (9:50 AM to 10:10 AM approximately)

Around 9:50 AM, I did my second attempted bowel movement. It wasn't so
much that I felt bowel pressure, but more that the posture of bowel
movement felt more attractive to me. I did have a little bit of bowel
movement, though it was even smaller than the previous one, and the
total across the two bowel movements was still a little less than a
normal morning bowel movement.

### Acetaminophen consumption (probably around 10:15 AM to 10:20 AM)

While I don't have clear records, I believe this was the time that I
took my acetaminophen tablet with water. While I didn't record the
time of consumption when I did it, I do have some search queries and
webpage visits that I believe were around the time of the consumption,
that my browsing history shows to have been made around this time.

### Trying to work from bed then alternating between bed and table (10:20 to 11:55 AM approimately)

As the seated posture wasn't working well for me, I moved my laptop to
my bed (something I do very rarely) in order to work from
bed. However, after about 10-15 minutes, my pain felt more acute, so I
stopped work, closed the laptop, moved it back to the table, and then
tried various postures including going back to bed, staying seated,
leaning forward.

At around 11 AM, I initiated various notification steps, marking
myself out of office for work and asking colleagues to take over my
on-calls.

At some point I was moaning and sighing pretty acutely, and it was
around this time that I decided I should make a trip to urgent
care. Around 11:42 AM, I called the nearest urgent care facility and
talked to them; they said they don't do appointments so I would have
to come and wait, with the waiting time starting only after my
arrival.

A few other notes:

* I experienced some chills, but no fever (my measured temperature was
  98.0 degrees Fahrenheit, though I don't consider the temperature
  measurement to be very reliable). I switched from shorts to pants
  and also switched to a thicker sweatshirt.

* I tried to measure my heart rate with the pulse oximeter, but it was
  failing to give a reading, and I gave up after a bit.

### Seeming improvement in symptoms and outside trip (11:55 AM onward)

Around 11:55 AM, I had a pretty rapid improvement in symptoms, with
the acute pain subsiding. My initial thought was that now, the
symptoms were good enough that I would be able to walk to the urgent
care (rather than take an Uber/Lyft).

I don't know if this improvement is due to the acetaminophen (as it
started around 100 minutes after, which is higher than the 45 minutes
that is generally expected for acetaminophen. The significance is that
if it's just acetaminophen masking the continued underlying issue,
then the issue would recur as the acetaminophen wore off; however, at
least for that day and the next day, acute pain did not return, so my
current suspicion is that the acetaminophen was not the primary
reason, though it might have helped.

One other thing that happened around the same time as my symptom
improvement was progress toward the resolution of my house
issues. This is suggestive that the stress associated with the house
issues was aggravating my pain, but it could just be a coincidence.

At around 12:05 PM, I left my home, heading toward the urgent
care. However, a few minutes in, I felt that I was feeling well enough
that going to urgent care didn't make sense. So I changed direction
and went to Berkeley Bowl to stock up on some food items that might
make sense given my digestive issues -- rice and vegan yogurt (I
already had some rice at home, but I had just used up my vegan yogurt
supply yesterday and had anyway been planning to go purchase more).

### Continued reasonable health

For the rest of the day (2024-04-25) I continued to be reasonably
functionally well. A lot of the morning and early afternoon was spent
in documentation work and wrapping up various threads, so my first
meal of the day was delayed to 4 PM, by which time my pain had cleared
enough for me to feel hungry.

I did have to do a large load of regular laundry, which ended up
resulting in me delaying dinner to about 9 PM, going to bed fairly
late (around 12:30 AM).

## The next few days

### The next day (2024-04-26)

On 2024-04-26, I woke up around 8:40 AM, so I got a decent eight hours
of sleep, like the previous day, but still not enough to catch up on
the minor backlog built on Tuesday. I went for a bowel movement around
10:20 AM, once there was enough pressure. I had a fairly small bowel
movement, but unlike the previous day (2024-04-25) I did not try to
push too hard. I did not experience much abdominal pain.

I had a lot of threads to wrap up, so I ended up having my meal around
1:15 PM.

Considering that I don't have any big deliverables with work and
personal projects, don't need to cook or do laundry, and don't plan to
go exercise, I expect to be able to sleep a little early and thereby
catch up on the sleep backlog.

In the evening, I experienced a resurgence of salivation and masseter
muscle pain, though it was way less than the peak that I had
experienced after my [2024-04-03 dental
cleaning](2024-04-03-dental-cleaning.md). I don't know if it was a
continuation or a different cause.

I went to sleep early, around 10 PM, with the hope that a
longer-than-usual sleep would help me with recovery.

### Two days later (2024-04-27)

I naturally woke up around 6:40 AM, feeling more refreshed, though
with continued salivation issues. However, unlike past cases of
salivation issues, I felt I had better control and wasn't drooling.

A little later, around 7:30 AM, I went for bowel movement. My bowel
movement was fairly normal qualitatively and only a little less than
usual in magnitude.

I had my morning meal around 11 AM. I tried a little bit of the lavash
and felt a little bit of irritation with that, so I decided that I
would cook another batch of rice for the evening as my current batch
of rice was ending (if I had reacted well to the lavash, I might have
switched back to lavash).

In the evening, I cooked rice and also ended up opening my second
almond milk yogurt pack to continue to soothe my stomach.

I went to sleep around midnight.

### Three days later (2024-04-28)

I naturally woke up around 6:50 AM. I went for a bowel movement at
around 7:10 AM and had a fairly normal bowel movement.

I cooked my potatoes prep in the morning and had my meal around 11
AM. I had my second meal around 5 PM. I felt fairly normal during the
day though still a little heavy in the abdominal area. I went to sleep
shortly before midnight. Around the time of going to sleep, I did feel
(in addition to being a bit heavy in the abdominal area) a little bit
of postural discomfort (not outside the range of what I occasionally
feel even when well) that I anticipated partly to staying up late. The
discomfort persisted a little bit when I lay down but soon subsided
and I had a decent sleep.

### Four days later (2024-04-29)

I got up around 6:35 AM to urinate, then went back to bed for an hour.

When I woke up, I continued to feel a little heavy in the abdominal
area, but otherwise was fine -- I had a normal bowel movement. After
the bowel movement, I felt largely fine, though still a little
sluggish.

Slight abdominal discomfort continued through the day, and it seemed
to be higher up than before (above the belly).

At around 3:50 PM I decided to initiate a teleconsultation. I
requested a teleconsultation via Teladoc (through my insurance). I
filled in my history and indicated that my problem was a type of
pain. I gave my phone number and was told I'll get a callback
shortly. I got a callback within a minute.

The doctor who called me asked me a bunch of questions that elicited
some portion of the details shared here. Based on my answers, he said
that I didn't fit in any particular condition based on the
information, but he recommended going to urgent care where they may do
a physical exam and run blood tests and a urine test. The urine test
would be on-site. I asked about kidney stones and he said that the
urine test would help with determining that.

I went to the Milvia Urgent Care facility of Sutter Health, arriving
there a little before 5:30 PM, but they had a long enough queue of
patients until their closing time, so I left with the intention of
returning on a later date.

I had dinner around 7:30 PM.

I went to sleep around 10:25 PM. This was both due to my desire to
sleep early in order to get enough sleep (as I suspected that my sleep
needs were a little higher than usual due to whatever healing my
system needed to do) and because I was in fact feeling sleepy.

I believe sometime during the day on this day I tried to measure my
heart rate and SpO2 with the pulse oximeter, but got no
reading. However, it may have been the next day (2024-04-30).

### Five days later (2024-04-30)

I woke up around 6:40 AM and urinated, then went back to sleep. I
properly woke up a little before 7:30 AM.

I went for bowel movement at around 7:45 AM. I had a regular bowel
movement. I verified that I did not see any red or black marks (that
might indicate GI bleeding).

I continued to feel a little bit of abdominal discomfort, but it was a
little less than what I remember of yesterday, and it wasn't severe
enough to get in my way,

I also made a trip to urgent care; details of the trip itself are
recorded [here](2024-04-30-urgent-care-visit-and-tests.md).

I went to sleep around 10:50 PM.

### Six days later (2024-05-01)

I woke up around 7:20 AM.

I went for bowel movement around 7:40 AM and had a normal bowel
movement.

I had my meals at around 11:20 AM and 4:40 PM respectively.

I went to sleep around 10:25 PM.

### Seven days later (2024-05-02)

I woke up around 6:20 AM to urinate, then went back to bed and got up
again around 7:20 AM.

I went for bowel movement around 7:45 AM and had a normal bowel
movement.

I had my first meal around 1:15 PM.

I took a pulse oximeter reading around 4:40 PM. For the first time in
a while, I got a clear reading of around 55-65 bpm and SpO2 of 97-98%.

I had my second meal around 6:30 PM.

I went to sleep around 10:20 PM.

### Eight days later (2024-05-03)

I woke up around 6:12 AM to urinate, then went back to bed.

I properly woke up around 7:25 AM. I went for my bowel movement around
7:40 AM and had a normal bowel movement.

I had my meals around 11:05 AM and 5 PM.

I went to sleep around 11 PM.

### Nine days later (2024-05-04)

I woke up around 7:04 AM. I had my bowel movement around 7:25 AM.

I had my meals at around 10 AM and 5 PM respectively.

Considering my general pain range from 0 to 2, this day was
interesting in that, unlike early in the week, my pain didn't reach a
2, but it was at a 1 (compared to the modal value of 0) for a much
larger fraction of the day than previous days. I have three theories
for this:

* It was considerably colder (see [Thermal comfort](#thermal-comfort)
  section below).

* Due to the need to be up a little earlier, and having slept a little
  later, I did not get extra sleep as I had been getting in the last
  few days.

* Perhaps the lavash getting drier caused some added irritation; I
  acted on this by disposing of the remaining lavash; see
  [food_waste.sql](../sql/food_waste.sql) for details.

### Ten days later (2024-05-05)

I woke up around 6:15 AM to urinate, then went back to sleep. I woke
up again around 7:10 AM for good.

I went to the restroom a little before 8 AM. I had a full bowel
movement.

I had my meals around 9:35 AM and 5 PM.

I went to sleep a little after 11 PM.

### Eleven days later (2024-05-06)

I woke up around 3:25 AM to urinate and close the window, as it was
much colder than it had been at night when I went to sleep.

I went back to sleep and woke up properly around 8:08 AM.

I had my first meal around 12:30 PM. The significant delay was due to
the time spent on rice prep, plus additional delay as things came up
in relation to my day job.

I went for jogging + walking about 40 minutes starting around 4:30
PM. See the [2024 activity tracker](2024-activity-tracker.md) for more
related details.

I had dinner at around 7:30 PM.

I went to sleep around 11:10 PM.

### Twelve days later (2024-05-07)

I woke up around 6:10 AM to urinate and then properly woke up around
7:05 AM.

I went for bowel movement around 8 AM. The bowel movement was normal.

As of 9 AM, while I still feel a little bit of bloating, there doesn't
appear to be any comeuppance for my exercise of yesterday.

NOTE: Starting from this point onward, I will stop daily recording,
but will continue to record cases where something sufficiently unusual
happened.

In the afternoon and early evening, I noticed a slight increase in
salivation, though not to the level that had happened shortly after my
dental cleaning.

The increased salivation continued after dinner and as I went to sleep,
though it was not strong enough to cause outward drooling.

### Thirteen days later (2024-05-08)

I continued to experience increased salivation, though less so than
the previous day; though it was somewhat high for a brief period after
dinner. I did not experience any clear abdominal pain (with the
exception of a brief bout of slight pain when cleaning up after
dinner), though it continued to feel a bit more heavy than when I am
fully healthy. I skipped heavy exercise to aid with my recovery.

### Fifteen days later (2024-05-10)

By this point, I was not feeling any abdominal pain for most of the
day, with only slightly-more-than-usual sensation under these
conditions:

* when hungry or full
* right after doing some intense exercise, such as a breath hold or
  continuous hand gripper use

In light of this continued progress, I filed away the PPI pills and
the paper documents I had received a part of my urgent care visit, so
that they are now stored with my documents rather than being readily
accessible at my table.

### Sixteen days later (2024-05-11)

I went jogging in the morning with the hope of resuming daily
jogging. See the [2024 exercise tracker](2024-exercise-tracker.md)
for more.

Later in the day, I felt neck and shoulder tension; see [2024-05-11
neck and shoulder tension](2024-05-11-neck-and-shoulder-tension.md)
for more details.

### Seventeen days later (2024-05-12)

In the evening, as I was running out of rice and needed a little more
calories, I opened up my backup whole wheat lavash bread and started
eating it. Even before I actually started eating, looking at the
lavash and anticipating eating it seems to have caused a little
tension in my abdominal area. I experienced some increase in ticking
sensations when eating and later. It's really difficult to know how
much of this is due to my cognitive expectation and how much is
actually happening from the wheat itself. There was no other
observable effect beyond the slight anticipatory tensing up and the
slight tickling sensation afterward.

### Eighteen days later (2024-05-13)

In the morning, I had a little bit of whole wheat lavash bread at the
start of my meal as my rice was still finishing up being cooked. This
time, I did not experience tension to the same extent as the previous
day.

Later in the day, I tried out the 200 lb hand gripper for the first
time, up from the 150 lb that I was now consistently closing with my
right hand (see [2023-07-29 hand gripper
exercise](2023-07-29-hand-gripper-exercise.md) for background). I had
been feeling pretty fit and fully recovered in the minutes leading up
to that decision. However, the effort involved in trying to close the
200 lb seems to have caused some abdominal tension.

Later in the day, when going out jogging, I noticed a little bit of a
tingling sensation in the left leg and slight tension in my abdominal
area; however, the sensation subsided after a while and I was able to
jog a little more than my usual amount.

It's unclear if the tingling sensation is due to the consumption of
the whole wheat lavash bread, the excessive use of the 200 lb, or
other reasons. However, I do feel that it's tied in to the abdominal
pain in some way, and reflects that I have not yet fully recovered to
the point where I can stretch on the diet and exercise front. Some
caution is still warranted, such as keeping wheat consumption low,
staying under my limit for push-ups, and not overexerting on the other
exercises.

Later in the day, I did my first round of strength exercises since the
abdominal pain, doing a normal amount except push-ups, where I did
slightly fewer than my limit. See the [2024 exercise
tracker](2024-exercise-tracker.md) for more information.

I had a little more of the lavash bread in the evening, and again I
felt a little tension and tingling sensation in the couple of hours
after eating. This further suggests that the lavash is at least partly
responsible for the tingling sensation.

### Nineteen days later (2024-05-14)

I had a little bit of residual abdominal discomfort in the morning,
but not enough to get in the way of my doing stuff. I was able to go
out shopping, cook food, etc. The pain also lessened as the day
progressed. I think this is consistent with the story that it was due
to the whole wheat lavash consumption, and I am recovering as the time
since the lavash consumption increases.

### Twenty-one days later (2024-05-16)

I had a little bit of general fullness and slowness in the morning,
with occasional slight pain. I decided to skip jogging and instead
finish up my Trader Joe's trip.

### Twenty-two days later (2024-05-17)

I decided to resume regular strength exercises (every 2-3 days)
starting on this day.

### Twenty-five days later (2024-05-20)

I experimentally consumed couscous, to see if my issues with the
lavash represented issues with wheat or general or were more specific
to the form factor or other aspects of the lavash. I did not
experience issues during or immediately after the consumption.

### Twenty-nine days later (2024-05-24)

I experienced a recurrence of abdominal pain, nowhere near the peak
but somewhat comparable to what it had been off and on in the week
after the initial peak. I'm hoping that this recurrence is brief. A few contributing factors:

* The [unplanned fast of three days ago and subsequent sore
  throat](2024-05-21-unplanned-19-hour-fast.md). This could be a
  recovery step as I noticed the sore throat improvement coinciding
  with the abdominal pain.
* It's cooler than usual, and thermal comfort has been an issue.
* I have been trying to shift my sleep schedule toward sleeping
  earlier, in preparation for upcoming travel. Also, on this day I
  decided to eat *before* jogging (and ended up skipping jogging after
  the pain came plus due to a bunch of stuff to be done). The
  combination meant more cold exposure and eating when colder, which
  might have interacted with the residual abdominal pain issues and
  the sore throat issues.

I did a bunch of palpation tests and pain self-ratings. My rating
(following [this](abdominal-palpation-sensations.md)) varied between
NSS, P0.0, P0.1, and P1.1.

## Thermal comfort

After the chills I experienced on 2024-04-25, and clearly feeling more
chilly than usual on that day, I didn't feel any outright chills after
that. However, I did notice some changes to my thermal comfort by
around 2 degrees Celsius or about 4 degrees Fahrenheit.

Normally, when the ambient temperature reaches around 24-25
degrees Celsius (about 76 degrees Fahrenheint), I clearly feel hot
enough to take off my sweatshirt. However, of late my threshold for
this seems to have gone up to about 28 degrees celsius (80 degrees
Fahrenheit).

Similarly, in the morning, when the indoor temperature is around 18 to
20 degrees celsius (64 to 68 degrees Fahrenheit), I feel more like I
would at a temperature of around 16 degrees Celsius.

## Pain interpretation

This section includes notes with some thoughts on the patterns of my
abdominal pain on 2024-04-29, 2024-04-30, and 2024-05-01. It does not
include the acute and almost continuous pain that occurred on the
morning of 2024-04-25. I believe I didn't have similar significant
pain from 2024-04-25 to 2024-04-28, though I did have general bloating
and clear indication that I shouldn't engage in vigorous physical
activity.

### Background sensation

My background sensation is of a little bloating and heaviness,
sufficient to dissuade me from vigorous physical activity that will
involve a lot of abdominal muscle use. However, most of the time,
there is no active pain in the area. Pressing the area does give a
slight sense of tension release, but that's it.

### Characteristics of pain triggers

These characteristics have been constructed by me through some mix of
empiricism and introspection, and have been influenced by my mental
models of how things work. I might be falsely fitting narratives that
aren't true. Even so, I think there's likely to be some truth to some
of these observations.

* A sudden short-run increase in physical or mental stimulation seems
  to be a trigger for brief pain. Examples include:

  * Sudden physical movement or a sudden plan to move physically, that
    my body had not been thinking about (examples might include
    responding to an alarm sound or phone call).

  * Some little insight or thought -- positive or negative -- that I
    have while working through some cognitive task. Normally, this
    insight would lead to a very slight rush of energy, which would
    then fall. However, I've noticed these days that sometimes that
    slight rush of energy is accompanied by slight pain, and that
    might also cause the rush of energy to be a bit higher to
    compensate (for more on the compensation mechanism, see the next
    point about offline versus online).

  Interestingly, for the most part, it seems that planned or gradual
  increases in physical or mental stimulation don't seem to have that
  pain effect. For instance, getting up to get ready for a planned
  outdoor trip seems to not cause any pain sensations. Similarly, the
  very limited exercises that I've been doing (occasional hand gripper
  use, standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercises, and breath
  holds) do not seem to create any pain at least in the beginning, and
  the pain only starts being hinted at when I'm at around the
  threshold that I had previously been able to attain while feeling
  well.

* I seem to consciously experience pain more when I am "offline" --
  not in a physical or social situation where I need to be attentive
  and alert continuously. I believe that in more "online" situations
  -- including ones where I am physically interacting with somebody or
  on a phone call or meeting -- I compensate for what would otherwise
  lead to pain, by ramping up my "sympathetic activity" (per my folk
  understanding) to suppress the pain, something that could result in
  sharp increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing
  rate. Something of this sort was likely playing a part during my
  urgent care trip, which might explain why I didn't experience pain
  while being examined, while also explaining elevation of the various
  metrics during examination.

  I've also noticed a little more pain in the period shortly after I
  go offline from an intense online experience, so whatever pain I
  suppressed while online probably comes back to bite me when I go
  offline.

  Since the majority of my time is offline, it's the offline
  characteristics that matter more to my average subjective
  experience, and getting to a good state offline will likely improve
  my overall condition.

* The pain for a similar trigger seems to be slightly higher in the
  morning. This could be due to just having competed a bowel movement,
  due to not having eaten for a while, or due to it being a little
  colder in the morning (in light of my changed thermal comfort
  profile).

### My just-so story

My just-so story is that my enteric nervous system thinks that I
should not overly stimulate myself physically or mentally, perhaps in
order to preserve resources for ongoing repair or healing work that's
going on there. It also "appreciates a heads-up" if I do want to
stimulate myself, so as to perhaps put a pause on the repair work to
allow me a brief period of stimulation. That's why sudden, unplanned
stimulation causes it to signal pain. Also, if it detects a pattern
where overall I'm not giving it enough resources for repair, it'll
signal pain even if nothing was done to it suddenly.

## Potential causes and aggravating factors

### Some kind of continued effect of recent travel and travel-induced stress

This is a bit of a far-fetched theory that was suggested to me: we're
more susceptible to problems in the aftermath of travel. Indeed, the
increased salivation after the dental cleaning (see next section) may
also be an aftereffect of recent travel.

### Aftermath of dental cleaning

After my [2024-04-03 dental cleaning](2024-04-03-dental-cleaning.md),
I experienced an increase in salivation and masster muscle
tension. This had mostly subsided by around 2024-04-18. However, it's
possible that some of the same causes for it also triggered the
abdomiinal pain. The resurgence of salivation on 2024-04-26 evening,
the day after the abdominal pain, is suggestive of this.

### Food factors

#### One-off food factors

* The food on Sunday 2024-04-21 was from a new source, and the kind of
  food is not something I regularly partake of, though it's also not
  food I have never had. I did have a few symptoms (slight soreness of
  throat) in the day after having the food, but was otherwise fine. I
  had a normal bowel movement from Monday 2024-04-22 to Wednesday
  2024-04-24.

* The outside food on 2024-04-24 from Udupi Palace may not have agreed
  with me. This would be weird, though, since I've had this food
  several times without issues, so unless there was something
  specifically wrong this time, I don't see the problem.

Either of these, or just some other food that I regularly consume, may
have contributed either in terms of the food itself, or some sort of
contamination of the food. I do not have any other indications of
contamination though.

#### Dietary changes in recent weeks

I normally have Alvarado Sprouted Wheat Tortillas from Trader Joe's as
my main source of wheat; however, starting around 2024-04-08, Trader
Joe's ran out of stock for these so I started buying other
alternatives, including TJ Carb Savvy Tortillas, TJ Indian Style
Flatbread, and TJ Whole Wheat Lavash. I ultimately settled on TJ Whole
Wheat Lavash since the Carb Savvy Tortillas also ran out of stock, and
the flatbread was too heavy for me. Although the lavash was pretty
reasonable, it is not quite as good as the sprouted wheat.

While I didn't experience any clear negative reaction (other than
enjoying the taste less) before the abdominal pain, I did notice after
the abdominal pain that sampling a little bit of the lavash did make
me feel a bit irritated. Also, about 2.5 weeks after the start of the
abdominal pain, after a week of abstaining from the lavash bread, I
tried it again and again experienced some mild symptoms that I hadn't
experienced in a while. I don't know if it is psychosomatic, but this
led me to stick to rice for a few more days, and also to try other
forms of wheat to see if there's something particular to the lavash
that is causing issues.

### Sleep factors

* Going from Saturday 2024-04-20 to Sunday 2024-04-21, I had to wake
  up early (around 5:45 AM), so I went to sleep early as well (around
  10 PM). Although the number of hours in bed was about normal, it
  took me some time to fall asleep after going to bed around 10 PM, so
  effectively I had fewer hours of sleep, and indeed I was unable to
  have a bowel movement when I woke up on Sunday morning. However, my
  digestive cycle *seemed* to be back to normal on the morning of
  Monday 2024-04-22.

* I got only 5.5 hours of sleep (around 2 AM to 7:30 AM) from
  2024-04-23 to 2024-04-24 (the day before my weird symptoms) which
  created a slight sleep backlog. However, I did have a normal bowel
  movement on 2024-04-24, so there was no immediate impact on my
  digestive cycle, and I generally expect the digestive cycle impact
  to be immediate.

* From 2024-04-24 to 2024-04-25, I had about eight hours of sleep
  (11:30 PM to 7:34 AM) which would have been enough normally, but
  didn't include extra sleep to catch up on the backlog. Moreover, I
  was woken up by an alarm on the morning of 2024-04-25, rather than
  fully naturally. So I might not have had enough sleep.

### Stress factors

* **Very unusual**: From 2024-04-24 evening (when I had the Udupi
  Palace meal) to 2024-04-25 around noon (when the acute abdominal
  pain started subsiding) I was facing a stressful house
  situation. While my conscious mind wasn't continually stressed about
  it, the issue may have upset some of my autonomic nervous system.

* **Moderately unusual**: I don't think I was consciously stressed
  about the event of 2024-04-21, but it (both the event itself and the
  travel back and forth, as well as the impacts on sleep cycle and
  digestive cycle that I previously mentioned) was pretty unusual and
  it may have gotten my systems a little out of whack in ways that
  were hard to notice.

* **Moderately unusual**: There's also another slightly stressful
  thread related to my personal projects that has been going on for
  the past few days.

Overall, I would say that I don't think stress caused the issue, but
it may have aggravated some aspects of the situation. In particular,
it may have triggered some kind of autonomic responses overnight from
2024-04-24 to 2024-04-25 that caused me to have more acute abdominal
pain rather than just a smaller bowel movement.

The first of the stress factors is the only one I would deem *very*
unusual -- it's the kind of thing for which no comparable thing has
happened for at least a year and probably for several years (though
other *different* kinds of stressors have happened in the past few
years that I would consider of comparable magnitude). I don't have
enough of a track record to know how my digestive system reacts to
these kinds of events.

### Kidney stone

I might have or have had a kidney stone. A stone can explain
significant discomfort across different positions, and subsequent
easing once the stone changes position. It's worth noting that I did
not pass urine at the time my symptoms improved around 11:55 AM on
2024-04-25, so the symptom improvement was not tied to passing out of
a stone. I have also not seen any evidence of kidney stones in my
excreted urine so far (and I do weakly expect that I would see some
evidence of this similar to that described
[here](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/kidney-stones/symptoms-causes/syc-20355755).

The notable thing about kidney stones is that they generally develop
over a longer period of time, so that this super-recent events
analysis likely doesn't cover the factors that led to the kidney
stone. Among these longer-term factors, my diet is high in
oxalates. At least, that's my unofficial sense comparing my [food
purchases](../sql/food_purchases.sql). I don't think I drink too
little water though; my sense is that my water consumption is
reasonable and maybe a little bit on the higher side, though there may
have been some periods in between where my water consumption dropped.

## Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) prescription

As part of my [urgent care
visit](2024-04-30-urgent-care-visit-and-tests.md), I was prescribed a
PPI called pantoprazole (Protonix) and picked up 30 doses of it from
Walgreens on the way back. However, after doing further research, and
observing the trajectory of my pain, I decided to not take the PPI. I
may document my thinking in more detail in the future.

On 2024-05-10, in light of my continued recovery, I decided to put my
PPI in storage and added a calendar reminder to dispose of the PPI on
its expiration date (one year after my pickup date of 2024-04-30).

I ultimately threw the pantoprazole (Protonix) out of 2025-04-29, a
day prior to the expiration date.
