# 2024-01-12: Pfizer COVID vaccine: updated booster dose

This document describes my plan for receiving the Pfizer COVID vaccine
in January 2024, as well as my experience after actually receiving the
vaccine.

Sections of this document:

* [Decision to get the booster and choice of timing](#decision-to-get-the-booster-and-choice-of-timing)
* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)
* [Appointment (2024-01-12)](#appointment-2024-01-12)
* [Aftereffects: day of vaccine (2024-01-12)](#aftereffects-day-of-vaccine-2024-01-12)
* [Aftereffects: overnight (from 2024-01-12 to 2024-01-13)](#aftereffects-overnight-overnight-from-2024-01-12-to-2024-01-13)
* [Aftereffects: next day (2024-01-13)](#aftereffects-next-day-2024-01-13)

## Decision to get the booster and choice of timing

I think an annual frequency of getting the COVID booster is a
reasonable trade-off between the benefits of regular vaccination for
keeping my immunity reasonably okay (in the absence of actually
getting the disease, which may be great for immunity, but is exactly
what I'm trying to avoid) and the adverse effects of the vaccine. The
COVID booster seems to be settling into an annual update cycle, and
the update for the 2023-2024 season has been available since September
2023. So, getting a booster during the 2023-2024 season makes sense.

My timing of January 2024 is mainly driven by a desire to have high
immunity during my international flight to India and back; these
flights are in mid-February and mid-March respectively. If it had not
been for this consideration, I would likely have gotten my booster in
November or December.

I'm currently thinking of getting the booster on a Friday,
specifically one of the days January 12, January 19, and January 26. A
Friday allows me to recover during the weekend, where my externally
imposed load of work or other stimuli is low; also, as of now, I do
not have any planned events in the wekeends after any of these
Fridays. Here are my thoughts on the relative merits:

Friday January 12 may be best in terms of maximizing recovery time,
since Monday January 15 is a work holiday (for Labor Day); also,
getting the vaccine done sooner is, all said and done, better for my
sanity and optionality, as there may be other things that come up
related to my India travel that I need to attend to. Also, if the
weather is really bad, I have flexibility to delay the appointment a
few days, a flexibility I will have less of the more I delay.

In terms of the immunity as a function of time, there isn't
super-granular data, but research such as
[this](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmoa2117128) (that has
graphs of COVID vaccine effectiveness as a function of time) suggests
that effectively increases quickly up to 1 month, then slowly from 1
to 2 months, then decreases from 2 to 3 months, so that the 3-month
effectiveness is about the same as the 1-month effectiveness. The
differences between effectiveness at the 1-month, 2-month, and 3-month
mark are not super-huge. The time period covered by this research was
before the omicron variant became dominant, so it is likely somewhat
outdated. But overall, I think around 1 month prior to my departure
makes sense; this would be 2 months prior to my return, and if for
whatever reason my return gets delayed a bit, my return would still be
within 3 months of it.

## Apppointment booking

### Preliminary check on 2023-12-09

On Saturday 2023-12-09, I logged in to the Walgreens website to check
vaccine appointment availability.

The default value doesn't show the closest location at all (Adeline
Street) but that's because it is limited to locations within 25 miles
of where I am *and* with appointments available today. By changing the
radius to 5 miles and changing the appointment date to a later date
(starting tomorrow 2023-12-10), I can pull up availability at Adeline
Street.

As of 2023-12-09, appointments are available at Adeline Street from
the next day (2023-12-10) all the way to Saturday January 6
(2024-01-06); also, starting 2023-12-12 (three days from now), all or
almost all appointment times are available. The range of available
appointment times is from around 9:30 AM or 9:45 AM to 4:30 PM or 4:45
PM at 15-minute intervals, with slots from 1:15 PM to 2:15 PM missing.

Since it looks like an appointment can be booked up to 2024-01-06, I'm
expecting that if I check in a week from now, I'll be able to book an
appointment for Friday 2024-01-12. So, I am setting a calendar
reminder for next Saturday (2023-12-16) to book the appointment.

### Appointment booking on 2023-12-16

On Saturday 2023-12-16, I logged in to the Walgreens site to book a
COVID-19 vaccine appointment for Friday 2024-01-12, as planned. The
selected vaccine was the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, consistent with my
previous vaccines that were also Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines. I booked
the appointment for 3 PM.

I also finished the consent form. The vaccine information statement it
linked to is
[here](https://www.walgreens.com/images/adaptive/pdf/pharmacy/COVID-19_Comirnaty_Pfizer-BioNTech_Fact-Sheet.pdf).

I confirmed that I received the email about the appointment. The email
(as well as the website) reminded me to bring my COVID-19 vaccine
information card. The email also told me to arrive at the location 15
minutes prior to the appointment, similar to previous emails.

## Appointment (2024-01-12)

I arrived at the appointment location on Friday 2024-01-12 at 2:45 PM,
15 minutes before the scheduled appointment time (the appointment
instructions recommend arriving 15 minutes before the scheduled
appointment time, so I followed those instructions precisely). The
line moved quite slowly, and I got to the counter at about 3:25 PM,
when I was initially processed. At 3:40 PM, I signed the form (I had
filled it online, so they just needed to print it out, but their
system was slow). I then waited outside the vaccination room, and got
vaccinated at 3:45 PM in my right arm.

Perhaps due to the large backlog, the pharmacist was in a rush and I
didn't get a chance to ask for my vaccine card to be updated before
the pharmacist left. So I went back to the counter and asked the
person there, who told me to wait. The person at the counter told me
that updating the card is now optional, but I felt it would still be a
good idea to get mine updated in case the rules change suddenly and
proof of vaccination is needed, particularly in light of my upcoming
travel (I did not explain the reasoning, as it was not relevant to the
person at the counter).

I waited till around 4:30 PM, when another person at the pharmacy
asked me what I was waiting for, and this bumped the matter back into
their awareness. A couple of minutes after that, a pharmacist updated
my card to indicate the vaccine I had just received.

## Aftereffects: day of vaccine (2024-01-12)

### Prior to 9 PM

Prior to 9 PM, I didn't really notice anything concrete other than a
bit of holistic fatigue (that further increased after 9 PM; see more
in the next section). It's worth noting that on my return journey from
Walgreens to my home (around 5 PM, a little over an hour after the
vaccine), I carried a light load of toiletries in my right hand and an
8 lb dumb bell (just purchased) in the other, and both worked fine for
me with no carrying fatigue. In contrast, when I had purchased the
other 8 lb dumb bell a little over two months ago, I remember having
felt tired enough to need to switch hands. So it seems that the
strength improvements from weight practice over the past two months
overwhelmed any fatigue from the vaccine at that stage.

### At night (9 PM to around midnight when I went to sleep)

The two things I noticed were frequent urination and soreness at the
injection site on my right arm. I did feel a little bit of holistic
fatigue but this was already expected given that the past few days had
been hectic; I was still able to get stuff done. The role of the
vaccine in holistic fatigue is unclear.

The soreness in my right arm seems to be more compared to what it was
for the previous dose, but I don't have an objective measure for
comparison. I suspect that the greater amount of muscle I have built
in the area (through strength exercises, including weights, pushups,
and hand gripper exercises) have increased the proportion of muscle in
the area (relative to fat), making injections more painful. The good
news is that this also correlates (in principle) with more
*effectiveness*. With that said, the fact that I did not do strength
exercises shortly before getting the vaccine means that my muscles
were not fatigued, which was good in terms of making them ready to get
the vaccine. See a [related Reddit
thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/FTMFitness/comments/juvw73/do_injections_hurt_more_after_gaining_muscle/).

My forehead no-contact thermometer is not super-reliable any more, so
take it with a grain of salt, but even as of 11 PM, it was not showing
a clear fever, with temperature in the range of 97.7 to 99.1.

By midnight, I had started feeling slight pain a bit more broadly, in
my right neck/shoulder area and to a lesser extent also in my left
neck/shoulder area.

## Aftereffects: overnight (from 2024-01-12 to 2024-01-13)

As the injection site was still a bit sore, I spent most of my night
sleeping on my left side, though I did switch to my right side
intermittently (with the weight distributed in a way that it wouldn't
fall too much on the sore spot). Overall, I subjectively experienced
feverishness, chills, and body aches, and felt the need to stay warm,
but the subjective measurement of this is confounded by the fact that
it tends to be cold at night anyway and I generally feel cold at
night.

I woke up a little after 10 AM (later than my usual time, though not
by much) feeling okay though not in perfect health. My temperature
readings were now in the 98.7 to 99.1 range, and I did not
subjectively feel feverish.

## Aftereffects: next day (2024-01-13)

On 2024-01-13, the day proceeded largely normally. I was more sluggish
than usual, needing a little more TV show / movie entertainment to
keep me going, and had fewer total accounted-for hours as a result. My
mood started to recover by the late evening, and I was able to get
some work done while rewatching a TV show. By the end of the day
(after 1 AM) I was back to normal with the exception of continued
soreness in the injection area.

I took the bandage off around 10 PM as it was getting loose anyway.

## Continued recovery

After 2024-01-13, I did not have any clear-cut symptoms related to the
COVID vaccine. A few notes:

* **Soreness**: On 2024-01-14 and 2024-01-15, I continued to
  experience slight soreness in the vaccine area when touching or
  rubbing it deliberately, though the soreness wasn't enough for me to
  spontaneously notice. By the evening of 2024-01-16, the soreness had
  disappeared.

* **Reduced energy for physical exercise**: I did not experience any
  noticeable fatigue after 2024-01-13 for sedentary work; however, my
  runs were a little shorter than usual on 2024-01-15 and 2024-01-17,
  likely due to continued recovery from the COVID vaccine. They were
  not, however, short in absolute terms for a healthy/fit person who
  doesn't regularly do that exercise; just short relative to *my*
  baseline. See [2024-exercise-tracker.md](2024-exercise-tracker.md)
  for more.

  Relatedly, I'm planning to resume strength exercises on 2024-01-19
  or later, to avoid putting stress on the muscle area where the
  vaccine was injected.

* **Reduced work output**: On both 2024-01-13 and 2024-01-15, my total
  accounted-for hours were lower than usual. While on 2024-01-13 I
  also experienced subjective fatigue, the situation on 2024-01-15 was
  different; I felt energetic but was a little slower than usual. By
  2024-01-16, things appear to have fully returned to normal.
