# 2024-10-25 flu shot

Sections of this document:

* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)
* [Prior preparation](#prior-preparation)
* [Appointment](#appointment)
* [Aftereffects](#aftereffects)

## Appointment booking

I booked my appointment for the flu shot on Saturday October 12. The
appointment is for Friday October 25 at 3 PM at the 2801 Adeline
Street location.

I followed the [best practices around vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.md)
for the process. I also set up all the calendar reminders and executed
on the other preparatory steps as recommended in that document. In
particular, the time of Friday 3 PM was lifted straight from the best
practice (and is also consistent with my choice for the past few
vaccine appointments).

One special consideration I'll call out here is that I did the booking
3 days after my [dental cleaning](2024-10-09-dental-cleaning.md),
which was enough time for me to be confident that aftereffects of the
dental cleaning (such as excess salivation or increased sensitivity)
had not materialized. Nonetheless, I maintained the gap of over two
weeks between the dental cleaning and the vaccine appointment, per the
best practice.

## Prior preparation

### Pausing of all strength exercises, hand gripper exercises, and dead hang exercises starting 2024-10-23

Starting 2024-10-23, two days prior to the appointment, I stopped all
strength exercises, hand gripper exercises, and dead hang
exercises. The goal was to reduce tension in the neck, shoulder, and
arm muscles. This pause was based on the [best practices around
vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.md).

### Skipping all exercises the day of (2024-10-25)

On 2024-10-25, I skipped all exercises in the morning. However, I did
end up having to go to Trader Joe's for some shopping, so that I
wouldn't have to do it after getting the flu shot. This was because
the trip I made on Wednesday 2024-10-23 I was not able to buy enough
stuff to sustain me through the next few days, and due to time
constraints I had not been able to make a trip on Thursday 2024-10-24.

## Appointment

I arrived at the Walgreens pharmacy line at 2:37 PM, for an
appointment time of 3 PM and a reporting time of 2:45 PM. However, the
line moved slowly and by the time I got to the counter it was 2:58
PM. The good news for the future is that I learned that instead of
waiting in line, I should scan the QR code displayed near the counter
and do an online check-in, then talk to the people at the counter to
do the check-out.

Unlike the last few times I did not have to fill in anything on a
paper form -- the digital check-in process included the incremental
questions over and above the consent form that I had already filled in
(questions about currently being sick or recently being exposed to
COVID-19).

It took a few minutes for the electronic submission to go through. At
around 3:09 PM, I finishd the check-out and was given the flu shot
sheet with a time of 3:15 PM and told to wait for the shot. The flu
shot sheet specified the vaccine as Flucelvax 0.5ml IM PFS (IM =
intramuscular, PFS = pre-filled syringe). I like this because
Flucelvax is a [cell-based
vaccine](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/cell-based.htm), which means
less animal suffering (as it doesn't use hen's eggs, but mammalian
cell cultures) as well as possibly greater protection due to the use
of mammalian cell cultures.

I was called in at around 3:15 PM. After confirming my details, the
pharmacist gave me the shot and bandaged me. I got the shot in my
right arm. She asked me to stay in the store for 15 minutes.

I checked all my belongings and exited the room at 3:16 PM.

Rather than just stand around, I started collecting items to shop. The
shopping checkout process ended at 3:28 PM; I then collected my
belongings and left the store.

Since I had ended up using up a decent number of MEWs with the Trader
Joe's trip earlier in the day plus standing around at Walgreens, I
decided to skip additional outside chores for the day. Instead, I
headed back home.

## Aftereffects

### Evening after vaccine (2024-10-25 evening): slightly more fatigue / lower energy than usual

In the evening after the vaccine, I felt slightly more fatigue than
usual; however, it was not significant enough to meaningfully affect
my within-home activities of meal prep, day job work, and other
tasks. The fatigue was different from the fatigue that correlates with
lack of sleep.

### Sleeping at night (2024-10-25 night): a bit of fever-and-chills feeling

I went to sleep at 11:43 PM. Initially, I took care not to put weight
on the vaccine arm; however, by the morning I was freely putting
weight on the vaccine arm.

Early on, I had a bit more of a fever-and-chills feeling -- feeling
like my body was generating heat but also that it needed to stay warm
(more than I would expect at this ambient temperature). However, it
was not very strong. I went to sleep and had a fairly normal sleep.

### Morning after (2024-10-26 morning): slight soreness on touch

On the morning of 2024-10-26, I did not experience any clear symptoms,
other than slight soreness on touch. I expect to continue to follow
best practices.

### No clear symptoms going forward; removal of bandage on 2024-10-28

The soreness on touch reduced over the next two days. By Monday
morning, there was no clear soreness.

I went out for Amazon package pickup on the afternoon of Sunday
2024-10-27. The load was relatively light so not stressful for my arm
to carry back.

I removed the bandage on the morning of Monday 2024-10-28 around 9:45
AM.

## Comparisons with past vaccine administrations

### Comparison with the recent Tdap vaccine booster dose (my most recent vaccine before this)

I had recently gotten a
[Tdap booster dose](2024-07-12-tdap-vaccine-booster-dose.md) where,
I followed the same set of precautions based on the [best practices around
vaccine
appointments](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-vaccine-appointments.md).

With the Tdap booster dose, I had found that the soreness, far from
disappearing in two days, had spread over a wider area. In both cases,
I was injected with 0.5 ml IM PFS, so the difference is likely due to
the difference in the materials injected (Boostrix for Tdap, Flucelvax
for flu).

### Comparison with the 2023 flu shot

The [2023-10-13 flu shot](../2023/2023-10-13-flu-shot.md) had been
followed by more arm/shoulder fatigue and longer-lasting soreness on
touch. I believe this was driven by my taking fewer precautions, and
in particular by resuming hand gripper exercises the day after the
vaccine. The greater degree of precaution this time (following the
best practices I put together in the interim) likely spared me the
negative consequences.
