# 2024-10-02: Atrantil purchase

On 2024-10-02, I purchased Atrantil, a total of 90 capsules. The
recommended dose is about 6 (2 per meal for 3 meals) when trying to
fix issues, and 2-3 for maintenance dosing.

On 2024-10-07, I picked up the purchased Atrantil.

My plan, as of 2024-10-08, was to start experimenting with taking the
Atrantil in a few days, once I have finished my [2024-10-09 dental
cleaning](2024-10-09-dental-cleaning.md).

However, the resurgence of some level of abdomainal pain on 2024-10-08
and 2024-10-09 led me to decide to start with Atrantil on
2024-10-09. I took one capsule on the evening of 2024-10-09, to see if
there was any (positive or negative) reaction. After confirming no
negative reaction, I upped to two capsules the morning of
2024-10-10. I continued at 2 capsules per day until 2024-10-16
(inclusive) and then stopped. For more on the abdominal discomfort
symptoms and their evolution, see
[here](2024-10-08-abdominal-discomfort-and-other-symptoms.md).

On 2024-10-13 (and maybe a few times prior to that) I noticed
occasionally getting a nutty burp where the kind of nut felt different
from the only nut I directly eat (walnuts) so I wonder if that's the
horse chestnut part of Atrantil.

As of 2024-10-17, my plan was to pause for a week (until 2024-10-23
inclusive) after which I will decide whether to resume on an ongoing
basis, resume only in case of symptoms above some threshold, resume as
an occasionally consumed supplement, or resume prior to specific
events (as a prophylactic).

On 2024-10-19, I took two capsules, going against my original pausing
plan. This was in response to [anal
swelling](2024-10-17-anal-swelling.md). I decided the next day that it
made sense to continue going with the Atrantil for a 20-day period
(until 2024-11-07 inclusive) to gauge the effects of a "full course",
while keeping in mind the possibility of stopping in case of adverse
effects. However, I changed my mind again on 2024-10-22.

## Tentative algorithm as of 2024-10-22

My current plan with Atrantil is as follows:

* Take it at 2 capsules with morning meal for 3 days continuously (and
  then decide case-by-case whether to continue) in response to these
  symptoms or indications:

  * High fermentation scores measured by FoodMarble

  * Functional digestive symptoms such as constipation, diarrhea,
    tenesmus

  * Significant abdominal discomfort that is enough to get in the way
    of my mood and activity (intermittent pain does not qualify)

  When deciding whether to continue after 3 days, consider improvement
  as well as signs of nutty reflux (burping) or flatulence.

* Otherwise, take 2 capsules in a meal about once every 5 to 14 days;
  this is more to do a bit of polyphenol replenishment and get regular
  feedback on whether it significantly helps or hurts me; if it helps
  me a lot, that might be suggestive of doing a course of a few days;
  if it hurts me, that is useful information for my contingency plan
  above.

I might revisit this in the future after I acquire more understanding
of the digestive system (both in general and mine in particular), but
for now I am considering the case closed for Atrantil. This will allow
me to experiment with other dietary and supplement changes and get
cleaner data on those.

## Stopping of periodic consumption by around the end of 2024

By around the end of 2024, I had stopped all periodic consumption of
atrantil. Since the end of 2024, I did not have the same kind of
abdominal discomfort issues that I had previously decided would
trigger the consumption of atrantil, so I ended up not taking any
atrantil starting at the end of 2024.
