# 2024-11-29: reduced hearing in left ear

## Overall summary

Here's what happened:

* I subjectively experienced compression of my left ear and a sense
  that I wasn't hearing that well in that ear when I woke up on
  2024-11-29. I verified the hearing imbalance later in the day.

* I checked every 3-4 days and confirmed that a hearing imbalance
  existed, but did not quantify it well until 2024-12-17. This
  reflected my ignorance of how to quantify hearing loss.

* On 2024-12-17 I did two kinds of test for a more thorough
  evaluation.

  * I determined the minimum volume in each ear where the words and
    other sounds of [Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You Do (Fifty
    Shades Freed) (Official
    Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo) were audible.

  * I did the online test at
    https://www.resound.com/en-us/online-hearing-test that tested my
    hearing in each ear at frequencies of 500 Hz, 1000 Hz, 2000 Hz,
    and 4000 Hz.

  Both of these confirmed hearing disparities between the ears. The
  test of different frequencies highlighted that the disparity between
  the ears gets more pronounced at higher frequencies, with the
  disparity really extreme at 4000 Hz. This means that when it comes
  to low-pitched sounds, the ears are not that different, but when it
  comes to higher-pitched sounds, the left ear has a lot more trouble.

* I repeated both tests on 2024-12-21, with a slightly more detailed
  evaluation, and got very similar results, though it seemed that I
  was able to make out the words with my left ear at slightly lower
  volume.

* Based on these, on 2024-12-23 I
  [booked](2024-12-23-berkeley-hearing-center-call.md). an
  audiological evaluation appointment for 2025-01-15.

* On 2024-12-24 overnight into 2024-12-25, I attempted at-home wax
  removal, but this did not succeed in or make any clear difference to
  my hearing situation.

* On 2025-01-02, I did my first round of testing with bone conduction
  headphones purchased from Amazon. The differences between the ears
  were much less with bone conduction headphones compared to normal
  headphones, suggesting that the reduced hearing in left ear was
  conductive hearing loss (involving the outer or middle ear) rather
  than sensorineural hearing loss (involving the inner ear).

* At the [appointment](../2025/2025-01-15-audiological-evaluation.md),
  the audiologist determined that I have a lot of earwax in both ears,
  so we decided he'll just remove the earwax from my ears and I can go
  home and see if my hearing issues are resolved; if not, we'll do a
  followup audiological evaluation in the office.

* After the earwax removal, I subjectively experienced improvements to
  hearing in my left ear, and when I redid the tests at home I
  confirmed that my hearing was approximately similar between both
  ears.

These were the characteristics of my hearing loss:

* Seemingly sudden, though I do not have similar data prior to
  2024-11-29. However, I do know that prior to 2024-11-29, when I used
  headphones, they sounded balanced between the ears, whereas know,
  they feel like they are about 60:40 toward the right ear.

* Seemingly more loss at high frequencies, with the biggest loss at
  4000 Hz and the second biggest loss at 2000 Hz.

* Overall magnitude of difference between the ears (for a blended
  track) seems to be somewhere between 10 dB and 20 dB.

* Conductive rather than sensorineural, as determined by the ultimate
  diagnosis (wax buildup, and fixed by earwax removal) and also as
  suggested by the fact that the difference was greater for normal
  headphones (using air conduction) compared to bone conduction
  headphones.

## Onset on 2024-11-29 and initial notes until 2024-12-17

NOTE: The initial notes are based on a poor understanding of how
hearing works. The later sections include better evaluations of the
situation.

On 2024-11-29, when I woke up in the morning, I noticed that my left
ear felt a bit compressed. I also noticed that audio seemed to be a
little less loud than usual, though I could still hear it clearly.

In the evening, I decided to do a test with my computer. I played a
single tune and shifted the microphone balance from 100% left to 100%
right. Overall, the 100% right felt a little louder (about 1.5x). I
also verified that when the balance was at 50% it felt a little louder
in my right ear, and moving it to about the 40:60 mark led to the
balance feeling even.

I also compared volume levels to confirm this ratio of about 1.5 (a
volume of 1.5x in the left ear felt like the same subjective volume as
1x in the right ear).

Unfortunately I don't have a prior benchmark to know whether my
hearing was balanced between the ears earlier.

My suspicion as of 2024-11-29 is that this is because I slept for a
long time on my left side. In fact, hearing in both ears may be
reduced somewhat, but the left side is differentially more affected
and that's what I am noticing. Based on Googling, it does seem like
sleeping on one side for long can be a contributor to more earwax
buildup that can reduce hearing. My guess is that this will subside
after some time, but my plan is to sleep more on my right side to help
address the issue.

I'll continue monitoring for the next few days and see if the hearing
situation persists.

UPDATE 2024-11-30: The situation seems similar (about a ratio of 1.5).

UPDATE 2024-12-02: The situation seems similar (about a ratio of 1.5).

UPDATE 2024-12-04: I feel like the situation is more balanced; the
ratio feels more like 1.25 now, and I don't feel that sense of
compression/heaviness in my left ear. I think this is close enough to
balanced, but I plan to do another check on 2024-12-07.

UPDATE 2024-12-07: The hearing balance seems to still be around a
ratio of 1.25. I've set a reminder to do another check on 2024-12-10.

UPDATE 2024-12-10: The hearing balance seems to still be around a
ratio of 1.25. I've set a reminder to do another check on 2024-12-13.

UPDATE 2024-12-10: The hearing balance seems to still be around a
ratio of 1.25. I've set a reminder to do another check on 2024-12-13.

UPDATE 2024-12-13: The hearing balance seems to still be around a
ratio of 1.25. I've set a reminder to do another check on 2024-12-16
(later deferred to 2024-12-17).

UPDATE 2024-12-17: The hearing balance seems to still be around a
ratio of 1.25, though I now feel like it's hard to really
differentiate within the 1.25-1.5 range.

The persistence of this issue led me to decide to dig more deeply into
the topic.

## More comprehensive evaluation on 2024-12-17

### More thorough testing of minimum audible volume

My previous testing was based on testing when sounds are equally loud
to the left and right ear. However, that requires more of a subjective
judgment. I decided to do something different -- take a soundtrack and
find the minimum volume at which I could make out the words when
playing it into my left and right ear.

The Macbook Air has a gradation of 16 levels and 64 sub-levels (the
sub-levels can be accessed by pressing alt+shift while adjusting the
level up or down).

I used the track [Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You Do (Fifty Shades
Freed) (Official Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo)
for my testing.

Here's what I found:

* With the right ear, I was able to hear and make out the words (for a
  known soundtrack) at the lowest level (1 out of 64).

* With the left ear, I needed to be at a level of around 14 out of 64
  to be able to make out the words.

I can't find a clear decibel mapping of the levels, but the
guesstimate is that the max volume is about 75-90 decibels, so
assuming linear increase in decibels with each gradation, starting at
0 dB for a gradation of 1, that's a difference of about 15 to 19
decibels in hearing between my ears. This seems significant -- my
right ear hearing seems fine whereas my left ear hearing seems to be
reduced.

### Free online hearing test at resound.com

Source: https://www.resound.com/en-us/online-hearing-test

I used headphones and set the speakers to balanced at maximum volume.

Left ear:

* 500 Hz: very barely at 7 sometimes, definitely faintly at 8

* 1000 Hz: definitely faintly at 8

* 2000 Hz: very faintly at 9

* 4000 Hz: definitely faintly at 8

* Overall verdict: Possible loss; it's slightly in the yellow

Right ear:

* 500 Hz: very barely at 6 sometimes, definitely faintly at 7

* 1000 Hz: definitely faintly at 7

* 2000 Hz: definitely faintly at 5

* 4000 Hz: definitely faintly at 2

* Overall verdict: No loss detected; it's all green

## Re-evaluation on 2024-12-21

### Minimum volume test for audible words

I used the track [Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You Do (Fifty Shades
Freed) (Official Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo)
on YouTube with the YouTube volume set to maximum, so I was only
adjusting my Macbook Air speaker volume. I used headphones.

* Left ear: I was barely able to make out the words at about 8/64
  volume, but tended to lose the thread of the words. It was only
  around 12/64 that I could consistently maintain the thread of the
  words. At around 20/64 I could get the words and some of the
  background music. To get the opening soft music properly, I had to
  get to around 32/64.

* Right ear: I was able to make out the words at 1/64 volume, though
  it took a few seconds to get my ear perked up, and there were a few
  parts where I lost the thread of the words. At 2/64 I was quite
  comfortably able to hear the words relying on the fact that I
  already knew them, though still not clearly hear the background
  music. At around 4/64, I could hear the words and some of the
  background music; at around 8/64, I could get the words and the main
  background music. To get the opening soft music properly, I had to
  go to around 16/64.

### Free online hearing test at resound.com

Source: https://www.resound.com/en-us/online-hearing-test

I used headphones and set the speakers to balanced at maximum volume.

Left ear:

* 500 Hz: barely at 7 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 8

* 1000 Hz: barely at 8 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 9

* 2000 Hz: barely at 10 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 11

* 4000 Hz: barely at 8 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 9

* Overall verdict: Possible loss; it's slightly in the yellow

Right ear:

* 500 Hz: barely at 5 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 6

* 1000 Hz: barely at 7 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 8

* 2000 Hz: barely at 4 (this is what I selected), more clearly at 5

* 4000 Hz: barely at 2 ( this is what I selected), more clearly at 3

* Overall verdict: No loss detected; it's all green

## Call to Bekeley Hearing Center on 2024-12-23

On 2024-12-23, I made a phone call to Berkeley Hearing Center to book
an appointment for Wednesday 2025-01-15 3:45 PM. Call details are
[here](2024-12-23-berkeley-hearing-center-call.md).

## Research on and efforts toward earwax removal on 2024-12-24

### Research and planning

On 2024-12-24, I began a bunch of research around earwax removal. The
goal was to figure out whether I could remove my earwax myself, and if
I did, to figure out the effect that removal had on my hearing. To
this end, I watched a bunch of videos:

* [How to safely remove ear wax at home using a bulb syringe](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Ee0VtgwmyI) by Doctor O'Donovan
* [How to Use Ear Drops Properly](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=65uAZr7TsAE) by Apotex Inc.
* [Ear Wax - Which Ear Drops are the best?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qos5xwAfTOI) by Vik Veer
* [Ear Wax- Which Ear Drops are the best? (followup video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkyX7KDzRzg) by Vik Veer

In the evening, I made a trip to Walgreens to get items that could
help with earwax removal. I ended up buying these items:

* Walgreens earwax removal drops (active ingredient: carbamide
  peroxide; this is a store brand equivalent of Debrox earwax removal
  drops)

* Earwax MD (active ingredient: sodium bicarbonate) from Eosera

* Walgreens earwax removal kit (this is a syringe design that is
  claimed to be superior to the bulb syringe that seems like the
  default)

After some thought after getting back home, I decided it's worth
trying the Earwax MD first. This uses sodium bicarbonate. The main
downside is that sodium bicarbonate, being alkaline, is not good to
apply repeatedly. So, it's important to limit to maybe two
applications within the space of a week. It also claims that it can
make significant progress in just one application, so my plan is to
see how that first application goes and pause if it doesn't succeed.

I watched the [How to on the Eosera
website](https://eosera.com/howto.html). My plan is to do this before
my bath on the night of 2024-12-24 *only for my left ear*, so I can
rinse out the ear as part of te bath. I plan to lie down for about 20
minutes total but I will see how things go and may end up lying down
for a little bit longer. I'll use the phone's timer to keep track of
time, and make sure that stuff is accessible to me while I'm lying
down on my right side, so that I can stay in position.

I also reviewed the [best practices around adding a topical treatment
protocol](../best-practices/best-practices-around-adding-a-topical-treatment-protocol.md)
which is intended to address loosely similar situations albeit still
somewhat different ones from these. Since I'm starting off by doing
this one-time rather than as an ongoing protocol, I don't need to
answer all the questions upfront. However, here are my current drafts
of answers.

* If there are different strengths and formulations, the difference
  between them: I watched some of the videos above to compare
  different formulations. Sodium bicarbonate is among the more
  effective, but may be unwise to apply frequently. The hope is that I
  make significant progress with the first application.

* Expected dose range: My plan is to limit myself to a single tube,
  and squeeze as much of it as I need to till my left ear feels full.

* Frequency range: I'm currently only planning to do this once to
  begin with, and at most one more time within the next week. I will
  re-evaluate after that.

* Minimum and maximum dose gap: Minimum gap of 1 day. No maximum gap.

* Impact of missing a dose -- is it advisable to double-dose, or just
  contine with other doses regularly? Don't double-dose.

* Any dependence or tolerance effects that are known: I'm not yet
  planning to do this often enough for such effects to become a
  concern.

Timing information: Based on the how-to, this is most convenient to do
before a bath so that I can wash the ear out properly.

Risk of getting in eyes: My plan is to keep my eyes closed during the
squeezing process, and for most of the 20 minutes waiting time after
that. If for whatever reason something does get in my eyes, it looks
like the priority will be to flush the eyes for a lengthy period of
time, and forgo the earwax removal benefits for this time.

Risk of getting on hands: The tube structure means that there
shouldn't be stuff getting on hands. Even so, I'll keep towels
handy to wipe my hands, and if a lot gets on hands I may again have to
abandon the earwax removal plan and focus on washing my hands first.

Other parts of the skin: My plan is to wipe off minor amounts that get
on the skin, but if a lot gets on and it's itching and burning, then
cleaning it up takes priority over earwax removal.

### Execution of eardrop application in left ear

I applied the Earwax MD eardrops on 2024-12-24 around 11:33 PM in my
left ear only, which was a little over 2.5 hours after I had finished
my second meal at around 8:58 PM.

Before beginning, I started my phone clock timer for 20 minutes. I had
also separated one of the five tubes from the others and loosened its
cap. I put two hand towels on top of my pillow, then I lay down on the
bed on my right side, with one hand towel in a position where I could
move it to above my ear as needed.

I uncapped the tube, then applied it with my left hand on my left ear
while holding the cap in my right hand. I kept applying till my left
ear felt full, with puses of a few seconds in between to gauge the
state of things. Once my left ear felt full, I capped the tube and lay
it down. I kept my eyes closed for most of the process except when
capping and uncapping, and mostly stayed lying down though I did tilt
up a littl bit (while still keeping the left side up) when putting the
tube down.

I then continued to lay down on my right side, with my eyes closed for
most of the time, till the 20-minute timer went off. The discomfort
peaked in the first 3 to 5 minutes, and then died down after that to a
steady level. I used the hand towel to clean out any leak around the
ear and also pressed it gently against the ear a couple of times over
the course of waiting. Overall, with the exception of the first few
minutes, this was close enough to a normal experience of laying down
and resting.

After the 20-minute timer went off (around 11:53 PM), I set a timer
for another 10 minutes; while setting the timer, I opened my eyes and
raised myself a little bit but continued to keep my left side up.

Around 12:03 AM, a few seconds before the timer was set to go off, I
checked my phone, saw that the timer is about to go off, then
cancelled the timer. I got up and checked the status of the portion of
the hand towel that I had used to wipe my ear. There were a few brown
spots there.

I then squirted warm water into my left ear using the Walgreens ear
syringe a few times. After that, I went for my bath, where I got more
opportunity to get water in my ear and check for wax. Overall, the
earwax felt more soft than usual, but I did not see a huge amount of
discharge.

### Hearing tests after eardrop application (past midnight going into 2024-12-25)

At 12:34 AM on 2024-12-25, an hour after eardrop application and after
having had a bath that should have been enough to wash things out, I
redid my usual hearing tests. I began with the [Resound online hearing
test](https://www.resound.com/en-us/online-hearing-test).

Here are the results for the left ear for the minimum level at which I
could barely hear the sound:

* 500 Hz: 7

* 1000 Hz: 8

* 2000 Hz: 9

* 4000 Hz: 8

And for the right ear:

* 500 Hz: 6

* 1000 Hz: 5

* 2000 Hz: 3

* 4000 Hz: 2

These results are very similar to the ones on 2024-12-21, so there
appears to have been no clear immediate change for better or worse as
a result of the eardrop application.

I also did my usual testing with the track [Ellie Goulding - Love Me
Like You Do (Fifty Shades Freed) (Official
Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo) on YouTube with
the YouTube volume set to maximum, so I was only adjusting my Macbook
Air speaker volume. I used headphones. Here are some of the findings:

* Left ear: I was barely able to make out the words at about 8/64
  volume (similar to the evaluation on 2024-12-21), but tended to lose
  the thread of the words. With a real stretch, I could go as low as
  6/64 and just barely make out the words.

* Right ear: I was able to make out the words at 1/64 volume. This is
  consistent with the evaluation on 2024-12-21.

I also did a new kind of evaluation, namely an equivalence evaluation:
for a low volume on the right ear, I tried to find the comparable
volume setting on the left ear that felt subjectively as loud. These
are my findings:

* 4/64 (or 1/16) on right ear roughly matched 24/64 (6/16) on left ear

* 8/64 (or 2/16) on right ear roughly matched 32/64 (8/16) on left ear

I also tested using the track [Shape of
You](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGwWNGJdvx8) and confirmed that I
got similar volume levels as for my main test track (Love Me Like You
Do); about 8/64 for making out the words with the left ear and 1/64
for making out the words with the right ear.

## Followup frequency tests to just be recorded in the SQL file; updates to cadence of checking

I've made a SQL file
[here](../../sql/frequency_hearing_test_results.sql) and I plan to
record followup tests only in that file until there is a dramatic
change or a clear trend. I will continue to record other tests (such
as using the YouTube tracks) in this file until such time as I develop
a clear testing protocol for those tests.

Going forward, my plan is to do the frequency hearing tests once every
3 days and the YouTube track tests every 6 days (i.e., with alternate
rounds of frequency hearing tests) until I get new information, such
as from my audiological evaluation.

## YouTube track hearing test results on 2025-01-01

From about 5:35 PM to about 5:40 PM, I did my usual testing with the
track [Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You Do (Fifty Shades Freed)
(Official Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo) on
YouTube with the YouTube volume set to maximum, so I was only
adjusting my Macbook Air speaker volume. I used headphones. Here are
some of the findings:

* Left ear: I was barely able to make out the words at about 8/64
  volume (similar to the evaluations on 2024-12-21 and 2024-12-25),
  but tended to lose the thread of the words. With a real stretch, I
  could go as low as 6/64 and just barely make out the words.

* Right ear: I was able to make out the words at 1/64 volume. This is
  consistent with the evaluation on 2024-12-21.

These are the results of my equivalence evaluation:

* 4/64 (or 1/16) on right ear roughly matched 20/64 (5/16) on left ear

* 8/64 (or 2/16) on right ear roughly matched 28/64 (7/16) on left ear

## First round of testing with bone conduction headphones on 2025-01-02

On 2025-01-02, I got my bone conduction headphones from Amazon. After
connecting them successfully via Bluetooth, I ran a bunch of tests.

For the frequency hearing tests, the results were shifted a bit
upward, suggesting that the bone conduction headphones, perhaps due to
lower overall volume, made it a bit more difficult to hear specific
frequencies. While the left ear continued to be a bit worse than the
right ear, the relative gap had narrowed quite a bit except for the
2000 Hz frequency.

On the other hand, for listening to an actual audio song, the bone
conduction headphones seemed better particularly at the lowest
volume. Testing with the track [Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You Do (Fifty Shades Freed)
(Official Video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo):

* Left ear: I was able to make out the words at 1/64 volume, compared
  to 6/64 to 8/64 with normal headphones.

* Right ear: I was able to make out the words at 1/64 volume, same as
  with normal headphones.

These are the results of my equivalence evaluation:

* 4/64 (or 1/16) on right ear roughly match 12/64 (3/16) on left ear

* 8/64 (or 2/16) on right ear roughly match 16/64 (4/16) on left ear

However, there was one big difference: with the bone conduction
headphones, with the left ear, even at high volumes, the words, though
legible, sounded muffled. In contrast, with normal headphones, raising
the volume high enough made the words clear. So, while the equivalence
evaluation above applies to overall loudness, the clarity/muffling of
words in the left ear never matched the level in the right ear even at
a 1/16 volume.

This suggests the following:

* There is some difference between the left ear and right ear even as
  far as the inner ear is concerned, but this might be limited to some
  specific frequencies, such as 1000 Hz. This difference means that,
  without help from the outer and middle ear, which might help with
  relative modulation of frequencies, the left inner ear always has
  trouble understanding speech.

* The outer and middle ear come to the rescue but they might be doing
  so by modulating other frequencies down in a way that makes me
  unable to hear soft sounds. Or, perhaps there is a separate issue
  (such as earwax) that is asymmetric in the outer/middle ear between
  the left and right ears, and clearing this out will allow the outer
  ear to play its modulating function better while still allowing me
  to hear at low volumes?

## Updates to intake form answers on 2025-01-13

On 2025-01-13, I updated the answers to my intake form for the
audiological evaluation appointment on 2025-01-15. This allowed me to
get a sharper, crisper sense of what I was looking for in the
appointment. You can see the updated answers
[here](../2025/2025-01-15-audiological-evaluation.md#call-on-2025-01-13-and-update-to-intake-form-answers).

## Conclusion on 2025-01-15

On 2025-01-15, as part of what was going to my [audiological
evaluation
appointment](../2025/2025-01-15-audiological-evaluation.md), the
audiologist and I decided to just do earwax removal, with the plan
being for me to do at-home testing and book a followup appointment for
a hearing test if I continued to have issues.

On the way back, and after getting back home, I had a subjective
perception that noises were louder than before. This subjective
perception grew over the first hour or so after I left the office,
which was likely an effect of my ears gradually drying out. However, I
deferred formal testing until after I finished dinner, to make sure
that my ears were completely dry.

Starting 7:50 PM, I first did the [Resound online hearing
test](https://www.resound.com/en-us/online-hearing-test) and recorded
the results in the [SQL
file](../../sql/frequency_hearing_test_results.sql). Overall, it seems
that hearing in the left ear got a lot better, with improvement for
both air and bone, and perhaps slightly more improvement on air than
bone. Interestingly, there appears to have been no clear improvement
on the right ear, with slight worsening for some frequencies and
slight improvement for others.

As far as comparison between the ears goes, with the new status quo,
for air conduction, the left ear seems a bit better with the lower
frequencies (particularly 500 Hz) and the right ear seems a bit better
with the higher frequencies (such as 2000 Hz and 4000 Hz). For bone
conduction, there is very little difference between the ears at any of
the measured frequencies.

This suggests that the earwax removal had an overall effect of
improving the left ear and very little effect on the right ear, but
that the ears have slightly different strength profiles in frequencies
for air conduction but not bone conduction.

I then proceeded to check real-world music videos such as [Love Me
Like You Do](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVVaqFDG6Fo),
[Stitches](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VbfpW0pbvaU), [See You
Again](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgKAFK5djSk), and [Ae Dil Hai
Mushkil (cover)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7OLyMcLVlGs). Here
are my observations:

* With air conduction (normal headphones), the minimum volume at which I could make out
  the words was 1/64 for each ear. There was no clear difference in
  the level of clarity in the two ears. At 4/64, I could comfortably
  make out the words in either ear.

  This is similar to before for the right ear, but is a clear
  improvement for the left ear, where the corresponding previous
  volume was 6 to 8 out of 64.

* With bone conduction (bone conduction headphones), the minimum
  volume at which I could make out the words was 1/64 for each
  ear. There was no clear difference in the level of clarity in the
  two ears.

  The volume level is the same as before for both ears. One difference
  from before is that there was no longer any muffled sense in the
  left ear.

I also checked for perceived loudness using both air conduction and
bone conduction. For both air conduction and bone conduction, there
was near-perfect volume equivalence, as judged in these ways:

* Moving the balance from left to right and back led to no perceived
  change in loudness. I tried this at different volumes and for
  different sound tracks, with both air conduction and bone
  conduction. There was a very slight change in the overall timber,
  which might be due to differences in the frequency profile of the
  ears, but it wasn't really noticeable unless I paid very close
  attention.

* When the headphones were balanced, the sound felt like it was mostly
  in the center of my head rather than skewed to the left or right.

Overall, based on these findings, I conclude that the issue of reduced
hearing in my left ear has been addressed.

## Coda regarding subjective loudness

The subjective perception of loudness that I experienced in the
evening after the earwax removal (such as from traffic, when flushing,
or when running water) gradually went away by the weekend of
2025-01-18 and 2025-01-19. I did verify that my hearing in the left
ear at low volumes remained intact, so it looks like the corection to
subjective perception likely happened at a neurological level.

## Next steps

Going forward, I have included hearing tests as once-every-two-months
tests, along with vision tests and dental photos. This should allow me
to monitor for hearing loss in either ear and take followup action. My
plan is to do earwax removal every 1-3 years by default, but sooner if
I experience a decline in hearing or a subjective sense of fullness in
either ear (of the sort that happened this time).
