# 2024-04-30: urgent care visit and tests

On 2024-04-30, in the afternoon, I went to Sutter Health's urgent care
facility at 2500 Milvia Street to get checked up for my [abdominal
pain](2024-04-25-abdominal-pain.md). This document provides details of
the visit, excluding some confidental information.

## Arrival and checkin around 3 PM

Around 3 PM, I arrived at the urgent care and went to one of the
counters. I had to show an ID proof and insurance proof, then had to
sign a few documents, after which I was directed to wait in the
waiting room area. I believe this was also the time when I was asked
about my ongoing medications and allergies, though I'm not totally
sure. Something about the air made me a little bit irritated in the
eyes and throat in the beginning, but within a few minutes I was
fine. I then waited in the waiting room area.

The person at the checkin confirmed that the urgent care visit itself
didn't have an associated copay for my insurance. However, followup
items could have copays.

## Nurse examination and patient history

Around 3:15 PM, I was called in by the nurse for some basic
measurement and history-taking. The nurse asked a few questions. She
told me to take off my sweatshirt for the blood pressure
measurement. Somehow, the combination of answering all her questions
while wearing a mask, taking off the sweatshirt etc., got me in a
somewhat heightened state. She measured my blood pressure and also had
me put my finger in the pulse oximeter. The measurement came to
154/83, with a heart rate measurement of 82 (I saw 69 on the monitor,
but 82 is what was entered on my chart). My respiration was measured
as 18 breaths per minute. All of these seem much higher than my steady
state, with my BP particularly high, so we did another measurement
with me laying back a little bit, after the initial excitement of
moving and talking had subsided. With this second reading, we got
122/84, which is still a little high, but more believable.

Some of the information I gave her:

* My height and weight
* My history: when the abdominal pain started, bowel movement history
  since then, and the current state of the abdominal pain
* In particular, she asked me to rate my *current* level of abdominal
  pain on a scale from 0 to 10. I wasn't feeling any pain at the time,
  so I rated it as 0.

The nurse also asked me to provide the name and location of the
pharmacy to which any prescription orders should be sent. I provided
the Walgreens pharmacy location.

She then asked me to go back to the waiting room and wait for the
doctor to be ready for examination.

The nurse examination was completed by around 3:25 PM.

## Doctor examination

### Initial questions

I was called in for the doctor examination some time between 4 PM and
4:30 PM (I do not have a record of the exact time). First, the medical
assistant confirmed who I was and had me seated in (I believe) the
same exam room where the nurse had examined me.

After a few minutes, the doctor came in and introduced himself. He
asked me for a brief description of the problem, so I provided that
again.

He asked me about the location of the pain. I said that initially it
felt like it was lower abdominal, but more recently it seems to be
upper abdominal. It's mostly in the middle, not the left or
right. Also, I occasionally feel some discomfort in the middle on the
back spine.

He asked me how I would rate the pain on a scale from 0 to 10. When I
clarified that it varies a lot, he asked me how I would rate it over
the course of today. I said it varies between a 0, 1, and 2.

### Physical exam

He then did a physical exam. He asked me to pull up the clothing over
my abdominal area. He then poked around the area in what seemed to me
like large kneading-like motions. He asked me if I experienced any
pain. I said that it didn't hurt but rather I felt a sensation of
relief similar to a tensed-up muscle being massaged.

He also used the stethoscope to listen in on my bowel sounds. After
doing an examination, he concluded that there were no concerning bowel
sounds, i.e., my bowel sounds were healthy.

### Additional questions and tentative diagnosis of gastritis

He finally asked me where I was born; I said India (perhaps the
question sheds light on childhood exposure to various micro-organisms?
I'm not sure).

He then said that the problem could be any of a number of things, with
the most likely being gastritis.

A lot of the stuff that happened was consistent with what is discussed
in the [Ninja Nerd video on stomach
disorders](https://youtu.be/mFOz0C6sI_I?list=PLTF9h-T1TcJiSHWyICtx_i1AGavZ7ciX2)
that I watched recently, so there was a lot of *deja vu* in my head as
I was listening to him.

#### Prescribed proton pump inhibitor (PPI) prescription

He said that he would prescribe a PPI. The instructions:

* I could take up to 1 tablet per day.

* The expected course was that I should start seeing improvement within a week.

* I could stop taking the tablets if they failed to have a positive
  effect, if I completely recovered, or if there were adverse
  efefcts. Unlike antibiotics, there was no need to commit to taking a
  full course.

He ended up prescribing 30 doses of pantoprazole (Protonix).

However, there were a few caveats before starting:

* The urea breath test that he also prescribed for me for H. Pylori
  needed to be done before starting on any PPI treatment, as PPIs
  could result in false negatives for the test (not false positives).

* Moreover, I was also advised to wait till the *results* of the urea
  breath test came out, because if I did test positive for the
  H. Pylori infection, then I would need to take a treatment tailored
  for that (likely a combination of PPI and antibiotics).

### Prescribed breath test for urea

To determine if my symptoms were caused by a H. Pylori infection, he
recommended a breath test. He recommended this instead of a stool test
as the breath test was fairly accurate and quicker to do. The breath
test had some preconditions: no food or water in the past hour, and no
PPIs (as well as none of a list of other medications) in the past 14
days. I satisfied these conditions, so I was ready to get that test
done.

### Prescribed additional tests

He ordered three additional blood tests:

* Complete blood count (CBC)
* Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)
* Lipase level

### Followup treatment plan

He said that followup treatement should be discussed with my primary
care physician. He said that if I wanted, I could call any of the
Sutter numbers and arrange to set up a primary care provider in the
Sutter network.

### Case of acute symptoms

I mentioned my acute pain that I had experienced on Thursday. He said
that now that I've gotten past it, it's hard to diagnose, but things
seem fine now. He recommended that in the future, in case of acute
pain, I should go to the emergency room or call 9-1-1 if I don't feel
up to the task. According to him, emergency rooms had more tooling
available, particularly around imaging, so that any acute issues could
be diagnosed immediately.

### Printouts

He gave me two printouts, one with the PPI prescription and the blood
tests and breath test that he had ordered, as well as a referral phone
number list for primary care, and another with a general set of
guidelines for abdominal pain.

The printout time was 4:27 PM.

### Question about course of gastritis without PPIs

I asked the doctor what the course of the (tentatively diagnosed)
gastritis was likely to be if I did or didn't take the PPI. He said
that, assuming the gastritis diagnosis, if I didn't take the PPI,
there was a good chance that the problem would persist and there was a
chance that it could get worse.

### Kidney stones question and urine level

I brought up the possibility of kidney stones. He said that it was
unlikely since I didn't have any urinary issues, but he decided to do
a urine test anyway. A few minutes later, a nurse came in and gave me
instructions to collect a urine sample. I provided the urine
sample. The doctor asked me to wait a few minutes for the test
results.

The urine test was completed on the spot and came back with no
observed issues (including stone fragments or traces of
infection). The doctor showed me a mini-slip of the results and said
that the results would be available online.

The test time was shown as 4:54 PM.

## Lab visit

After being done with the visit, I immediately went to the lab that
was opposite the urgent care. I would later learn that the lab is open
only until 5 PM, so I arrived only a few minutes prior to its closing
time!

The urea breath test had two phases of sample collection: the first
collected sample was just a normal breathing out. After that, I had to
drink a concoction, and after 15 minutes of that I had to do the
breathing out thing again.

I had a little troublue initially understanding the instructions. I
think "breathe out" didn't convey the force I needed to exert; "blow"
would have been a better term that I might have connected with
better. However, after feedback from my first couple of tries, where I
didn't blow enough air, I finally blew out enough air.

The person who was administering the tests to me then set a timer for
15 minutes later.

I then drank the concoction, put on my mask, and had my blood drawn
for the three blood tests. The time for the blood draw is shown as
4:58 PM.

When the timer was hit, I did the breathing out thing again. This time
I was able to blow enough air in and the test went through.

The person administering the tests told me that the lab results would
be uploaded online within the next ~6 hours.

## Walgreens trip

I had checked the Walgreens pharmacy hours while waiting and saw that
it closed at 6 PM, so I first walked over to Walgreens, arriving at
the counter at around 5:35 PM. They had not yet prepared my
prescription; they said they could do it within 15 minutes, but they
do close at 6 PM so I need to be back before then if I want to collect
it today.

I made a brief trip to Berkeley Bowl and then returned at around 5:52
PM and successfully collected my prescription. I had a copay of $1,
which, with taxes, came to $1.17.

UPDATE: I ended up never taking the PPI based on further research, and
ultimately threw it out on 2025-04-29.

## Cost breakdown

### Visit plus urine test

My insurance billed me $444.91 for the visit plus urine test, with a
provider-billed amount of $593 and in-network savings of $148.09. The
breakdown was as follows:

* Office/outpatient new moderate mdm 45 minutes (mdm seems to stand
  for "medical management" as opposed to "surgical management"):
  $434.29, comprising a billed amount of $576 and in-network savings
  of $141.71.

* Urinalysis test: $10.62, comprising a billed amount of $17 and
  in-network savings of $6.38.

I do not appear to have been billed yet for the blood tests and breath
test (this bill would come from the lab, not the urgent care). So I
don't know what that cost looks like.

I had been under the impression that the urgent care visit itself
would be covered by insurance, but this impression appears to have
been due to a caching of a prior misreading of the details of the
insurance plan (last year). The misreading was reinforced by the fact
that the people at the front desk as well as the doctor were confident
that I was covered by the insurance and would likely have no copay or
only a nominal copay.

### Other tests

I was also billed $488.23 for the tests. The breakdown was as follows:

* $355.04 for the H. Pylori breath test (compare to
  https://requestatest.com/h-pylori-breath-test that gives prices of
  $199 for LabCorp and $225 for Quest Diagnostics). This comprises a
  raw cost of $398 and in network savings of $42.96.

* $119.03 for the other blood tests (CMP, CBC, and lipase) which is
  not too far off from the cost of ordering these test via
  requestatest.com. This comprises a raw cost of $166 and in network
  savings of $46.97.

* $14.16 for the blood collection procedure itself (annotated as
  `collj ven bld vnpnxr`; I had to Google to map it). This comprises a
  raw cost of $20 and in network savings of $5.84.
