# Dead hang (with history)

Reference article: https://www.dmoose.com/blogs/training/what-is-a-dead-hang

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Build towards being able to go both underhand and overhand for at least 1 minute, when both are done in succession

A dead hang is a good way to improve the strength of my arms and
shoulders, while continuing to reinforce hand grip. It also helps with
balance and flexibility.

This will help me be able to carry and move heavier loads while also
stay balanced in more complex movements.

I can already do overhand for well over a minute, but the underhand
that I do following it is less than a minute. So, I still have some
ways to go to build.

There is significant overlap in goals with other strength exercises,
such as [pull-ups](pull-ups-with-history.md),
[push-ups](push-ups-with-history.md), and
[weight-lifting](weight-lifting-exercises-with-history.md).

## Current practice

Generally, I do this after returning from jogging.

* Overhand dead hang (palms away from me) for as long as I can; as of
  2025-01-26, this is 25 to 38 oscillations which is about 55 to 95
  seconds.

* Underhand dead hang (palms facing me) for as long as I can; as of
  2025-01-26, this is 5 to 17 oscillations which is about 11 to 43
  seconds.

From 2024-12-06 onward, I aim to do this once every 3 days, and more
specifically on the days after my strength exercise break and the day
before I do weight-lifting exercises. Previously I did the exercise on
alternating days, alternating with weight-lifting.

## 2024-10-02 onward: started underhand dead hang

On 2024-10-02, I started the underhand dead hang. To do this, I check
the time on my laptop, go to the dead hang bar, hang from it till I
can, then get off and check the time. The process of going from my
laptop to the bar and back takes 5-10 seconds, and the overall clocked
time is about 40-45 seconds, so my estimate of time with the dead hang
is about 30-35 seconds.

## 2024-10-06 onward: introducing overhand dead hang as well

Starting 2024-10-06, I introduced the overhand dead and got an
estimate of about 45-50 seconds.

## 2025-01-26 status update

As of 2025-01-26, I record dead hang based on the number of
oscillations rather than the duration because it's easier to measure
the number of oscillations. My empirical calculation of one
oscillation is that it's somewhere between 2.2 and 2.5 seconds.

In general, if I start with the overhand dead hang, I am able to do
somewhere between 25 and 38 oscillations, and generally betwen 28 and
34 oscillations. If I then follow this with an underhand dead hang, I
can generally do somewhere between 5 and 17 oscillations. The number
of oscillations for overhand and underhand in a session correlate. In
other words, the sessions where I have more oscillations for the
overhand dead hang tend to also have more oscillations for the
underhand dead hang. The gap between the two numbers on a given day is
usually around 20.
