# Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion exercises (with history)

Starting 2025-07-05, I began a practice of regular testing for
my angle of dorsiflexion and angle of plantar flexion.

## Functional relevance and goals of exercise

### Relevant to foot health and walking and running ability

Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are both important elements of the
gait cycle and in general for foot balance and mobility. However, it's
possible to gradually lose these and not really notice with regular
walking and running by compensating in other ways functionally, that
may create problems down the road. The goal of these exercises is to
monitor and get enough time to address issues.

### Verify and maintain decent angles of dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of at least 35 degrees each

The goal of the exercise is two-fold: first, it helps verify that I
have decent dorsiflexion and plantar flexion, and provides early
warning signs if not. Second, the case of trying to measure indirectly
helps me exercise enough to maintain the angle and combat any slight
natural decay.

## Protocol

Rather than directly measuring the angle, I measured the horizontal
length that is my foot length times the cosine of the angle. Moreover,
rather than measure it exactly, I compare it against the length of a
known piece of furniture to obtain a quick upper bound on this
length. The reference length would yield an angle of about 40 degrees,
so by being able to achieve at or below the reference length, I
confirm that my angles of dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are at
least about 40 degrees. After accounting for measurement error, this
confirms that the angles are over 35 degrees. This is a reasonable
angle.

## Triggers for overall exercise

The practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.

The other exercises I do along with this are
[standing-on-one-leg-toes-with-eyes-open](standing-on-one-leg-toes-with-eyes-open-with-history.md)
and
[standing-on-heels-with-eyes-open](standing-on-heels-with-eyes-open-with-history.md).

## History of triggers for overall exercise

#### Settings 2025-07-05 to end of July 2025

Starting 2025-07-05, I switched to doing this exercise on the
alternating days among days I skip strength exercises.

#### Settings 2025-10-13 onward

In August and September 2025, I was very erratic with doing this
exercise, partly as a result of a general squeeze on exercise time due
to things being busy. Specifically, in light of the [best practices
around exercise adjustment during hectic
times](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-exercise-adjustment-during-hectic-times.md#balance-exercises-and-other-niche-exercises),
I deprioritized this exercise during the hectic t imes.

The few times I was able to do the exercise were mostly during rice
prep, while waiting for water to be filtered by the water filter
before putting it on the rice. This eventually led me to decide to
just do this exercise during that time in general. The previous
exercise frequency was once every alternating period of 3 days (so
effectively once every 6 days). If I switched over to doing this
exercise at every alternating rice prep, that would roughly be once
every 7 to 9 days, which is a little less frequent, but probably fine.

So the practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.
