# Exercise routine

Last major update: September 23, 2023

Last pass of full document review (with updates and corrections where
needed): October 17, 2024

This document describes my exercise routine. I intend to update it
when there are changes to my ongoing routine. See also my yearly
exercise tracker docs (such as
[2023-exercise-tracker.md](2023-exercise-tracker.md) and
[2024-exercise-tracker.md](2024-exercise-tracker.md)) where I record
time periods where I deviated from the routine.

Sections of this document:

* [Functional relevance and goals of exercise](#functional-relevance-and-goals-of-exercise)
* [Jogging and return walking](#jogging-and-return-walking)
* [Weight-lifting exercises](#weight-lifting-exercises)
* [Push-ups](#push-ups)
* [Standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise](#standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-exercise)
* [Standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-open exercise](#standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-open-exercise)
* [Standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercise](#standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed-exercise)
* [Standing-on-toes-with-eyes-open exercise](#standing-on-toes-with-eyes-open-exercise)
* [Hand gripper exercise](#hand-gripper-exercise)
* [Dead hang](#dead-hang)
* [Pull-ups](#pull-ups)
* [Breath holds](#breath-holds)
* [Humming with intermittent pauses](#humming-with-intermittent-pauses)
* [Deliberate falling practice](#deliberate-falling-practice)
* [Neck strength exercises](#neck-strength-exercises)

## Functional relevance and goals of exercise

The various subsections list the potential goals that different
exercises have.

### Burn (generally daily frequency with exceptions for special occasions)

Some exercise help burn calories. For "burn" exercises, daily
frequency may be fairly important as my digestive and energy cycle has
a daily cadence. The main exercise of this kind is jogging + return
walking.

Functional relevance: exercises done for burn are therefore ones where
the direct execution of the exercise has effects on my daily
cycle. It's not just about *being able* to do the exercise but the
actual execution of it that matters.

### Build and recover (frequency should be between daily and twice a week)

For some exercises, the goal is to build/improve. For these, the
thresholds of what I can achieve (such as the peak difficulty level,
duration of hold, or number of repetitions) should be going up over
time.

For build exercises, the frequency has to be high enough to keep
challenging my body. However, as most exercises work by hormesis so
they break the body causing it to build back better, a daily frequency
might be too high if the body takes longer than a day to recover. On
the other hand, a frequency of once a week would be too low and result
either in deterioration or very slow improvement. Generally, a
frequency of at least twice a week is needed for "build" exercises.

In some cases, build exercises have associated "recover" exercises
that help recover from any overtraining effects of the build
exercise. These could include stretching exercises or massage
exercises. The frequency of the recover exercise should be similar to
that of the build exercise. Their relative timing may depend on the
specifics of what's being exercised.

Functional relevance: generally, the goal of a build exercise is to
make me more capable of handling specific real-world situations
better; this could be a mix of situations that occur regularly and
exceptional situations. The claim here is that building further beyond
a certain level will be helpful to the execution of those real-world
tasks.

### Maintain (frequency should be between daily and once a week)

For some exercises, the goal is to maintain a level, without trying to
improve. If I have already sustainably achieved that level, it should
be fine to do the exercise daily as the body is strong enough to be
able to recover in well under a day. On the flip side, for some of
these exercises, even a frequency of once a week may be enough to
maintain the level. It depends on the exercise.

Functional relevance: generally, the goal of a maintain exercise is to
maintain a capability I already have that makes more more capable of
handling specific real-world situations better; this could be a mix of
situations that occur regularly and exceptional situations. The claim
here is that maintaining my current level (or a somewhat lower level
as specified in the thresholds for the exercise) is helpful for these
real-world situations, and building to a higher level is not helpful
enough to be worth doing.

### Verify (frequency should be between once a week and once a month)

For some exercises, I expect that I don't actually "need" to do the
exercise to maintain the underlying capability, as other stuff I am
doing is helping maintain that capability. The goal of doing the
exercise is to regularly verify that I can still do the activity. For
verification exercises, a weekly frequency is generally good enough,
and even a monthly frequency may end up being sufficient.

Functional relevance: generally, the goal of a verify exercise is to
confirm that I have a capability (without being frequent enough to
help build or maintain that capability) that is useful for real
life. There are two claims here: first, that the level I'm already at
is sufficient, and second, that I don't need to do this exercise to
maintain it (because my other activities already help maintain it).

### Build and recover for special occasions (as-needed basis)

These are exercises of muscles where, under normal conditions, the
strength and relaxation profile of the muscle is good enough for
me. However, under specific conditions, that may not be the case. A
lot of these are "physical therapy" kind of exercises. Most of these
will be relaxation exercises (stretches, massages) but in some cases
they may also include strength exercises.

For instance, head and neck strength exercises are not usually needed
(at least, that's my current opinion) but they may be needed if I
overdo strength exercises or hand gripper exercises or get strain due
to a vaccine.

Similarly, masseter massage exercises are not usually needed, but may
be needed preventatively or after dental cleaning appointments due to
the strain on the jaw muscles from keeping my mouth open for extended
periods of time.

Some of these exercises may play a dual role of being "verify"
exercises during ordinary times (with a frequency between weekly and
monthly) but then be done more frequently either preventatively or in
response to a special situation.

Functional relevance: these exercises are relevant to the specific
situations I get into, which may be periodic or unexpected, but at any
rate are not frequent enough for it to be worthwhile to do the
exercises regularly.

## Jogging and return walking

Goal of exercise: burn + maintain (not trying to build though I do
expect some improvement over time))

I jog daily about 1.75 to 2.0 miles and walk back the rest of the
2-mile journey. My minimum threshold for the jogging portion is 1.67
miles, with reduced thresholds of 1.58 miles and 1.5 miles under
slightly and significantly degraded conditions respectively. I also
tend to walk around for most of my chores, though these generally
happen only once every few days.

See [here](jogging-and-return-walking-with-history.md) for more
details.

## Weight-lifting exercises

Goal of exercise: build

I have done weight-lifting exercises off and on, but mostly off, till
about 2021. I started doing weight-lifting exercises regularly in
November 2021 and have ramped them up slowly since then. See
[here](weight-lifting-exercises-with-history.md) for details.

## Push-ups

Goal of exercise: build

I have not done push-ups in any significant quantity prior to starting
in November 2021 along with weight-lifting exercises. I have ramped up
the number slowly. See [here](push-ups-with-history.md) for details.

## Standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise

Goal of exercise: maintain (not trying to build though I do expect
some improvement over time)

This is a standard exercise of standing on one leg with both eyes
closed. The exercise provides both a measurement of and helps improve
balance.

When I do this exercise, I do one round standing on the right leg, and
one round standing on the left leg.

As of March 2025, my aim is to be able to manage at least 66 seconds
on each leg, with adjustments for colder indoor temperatures. In
practice, I generally do somewhere between 60 and 100 seconds on each
leg.

See [here](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md) for
more details.

## Standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-open exercise

Goal of exercise: maintain (not trying to build though I do expect
some improvement over time)

This is a standard exercise of standing on one leg with both eyes
closed. The exercise provides both a measurement of and helps improve
balance.

When I do this exercise, I do one round standing on the right leg, and
one round standing on the left leg.

As of February 2025, my aim is to be able to manage at least 4 minutes
on each leg.

Given the long time commitment of the exercise, I aim to do it only
once a month.

## Standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed exercise

Goal of exercise: maintain

As of March 2025, my aim is to be able to manage at least 35 seconds
without having to lift and reposition either foot.

See [here](standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md) for more
details.

## Standing-on-toes-with-eyes-open exercise

Goal of exercise: build

As of February 2025, my aim is to build toward consistently doing at
least 3 minutes without having to lift and reposition either foot.

See [here](standing-on-toes-with-eyes-open-with-history.md) for more
details.

## Hopping

Goal of exercise: build (but maintaining may be good enough)

As of November 2024, my aim is to build toward being able to hop at
least 20 feet including direction changes. I don't yet have enough
data to gauge whether I need to build toward this or can simply
maintain. I may also change my goals as I learn more.

See [here](hopping-with-history.md) for more details.

## Hand gripper exercise

Goal of exercise: build, though the current level is a respectable one
to maintain

I started doing hand gripper exercise in July 2023 and have been
ramping up slowly in terms of both the strength of the gripper and the
duration of closing. I use 100 lb, 150 lb, and 200 lb metal hand
grippers. See [here](hand-gripper-exercise-with-history.md) for more
details, including reasons for skipping.

## Dead hang

Goal of exercise: build; the current level is reasonable but not great

I started doing dead hang in October 2024. See
[here](dead-hang-with-history.md) for more details.

## Pull-ups

Goal of exercise: build

I started doing pull-ups in November 0224. See
[here](pull-ups-with-history.md) for details.

## Breath holds

Goal of exercise: build, though the current level is a respectable one
to maintain

I generally do two breath holds in quick succession, both max-pause
breath holds, generally for 55 to 90 seconds. See
[here](breath-holds-with-history.md) for
more background information.

## Humming with intermittent pauses

Goal of exercise: build (I have a long way to go)

See
[here](humming-with-intermittent-pauses-with-history.md)
for more background information.

## Deliberate falling practice

Goal of exercise: maintain and verify

See [here](deliberate-falling-practice-with-history.md) for more
background information.

## Neck strength exercises

Goal of exercise: build (but no numerical targets or benchmarks yet)

See [here](neck-strength-exercises-with-history.md) for more
information.
