# Hand gripper exercise (with history)

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Build peak strength I can crush (to 200 lb)

I can currently crush the 150 lb with both hands, but am unable to
crush the 200 lb with either hand. My goal is to build toward the
point where I can crush the 200 lb, even if it is just for a second.

It may be that getting to 200 lb requires addressing other
constraints, such as increasing protein intake or doing other
complementary exercise. This is evidenced by the fact that progressing
from 100 lb to 150 lb was relatively quick, but progressing from 150
lb to 200 lb has been taking a while (though that's also partly
because I haven't been trying that much). It would be good to
understand and address these, though I would be fine if it takes a
while to get to 200 lb.

Functional relevance: strong peak grip strength can be helpful in
sticky situations. Probably the most likely real-world scenario where
these are needed is opening tight lids and caps. While peak grip
strength is generally not needed, opening tight lids with wet soapy
hands is one use case where I still don't have adequate peak strength
in some cases.

### Maintain how long I can keep the 150 lb and 100 lb closed

As of 2025-02-28, I can keep the 150 lb closed for about 19 to 31
seconds in my right hand and about 10 to 25 seconds in my left hand. I
can keep the 100 lb closed for about 25 to 45 seconds in my head and
about 20 to 35 seconds in my left hand when done immediately after the
150 lb. I think this duration is good enough, and in practice, trying
to crush for longer will just end up using more and more of my time
without clear benefits. Although I do expect some organic improvement
in how long I can close, I am not focusing on building to longer
durations.

I can also close the 100 lb with specific fingers excluded for
somewhat shorter periods of time; see the following section on
protocol for more information.

Functional relevance: 150 lb is more than my body weight, so being
able to grip 150 lb with a single hand for 15 to 25 seconds should be
enough for most real-world situations, including opening lids, using
handrails for support, and even rock climbing (?). Being able to do
100 lb for longer durations makes it clear that grip strength is not
the bottleneck for lifting heavy weights. I think strong grip strength
has been helpful occasionally for carrying complex, unwieldy loads
(where it's not just the weight of the load but the awkward way it
hangs which means I need to use grip strength).

## Current protocol and status as of 2025-02-28

### First of alternating days (focus on maintaining)

I do this sequence every alternating day in the morning, with the
steps in quick succession:

* Right hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 19 to 31
  seconds (as long as I can). I generally average about 22 to 28
  seconds.

  NOTE ADDED 2024-11-15: In cold weather, when my hands are cold
  (generally when the ambient temperature is below 16 degrees
  Celsius), I may sometimes not be able to fully close this hand
  gripper. In such cases, I may defer this portion of the exercise to
  a later part of the day when it is warmer. Alternatively, I may do
  the exercise with an almost-closed rather than fully-closed
  position.

* Left hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10 to 25
  seconds.

  NOTE ADDED 2024-11-15: In cold weather, when my hands are cold
  (generally when the ambient temperature is below 16 degrees
  Celsius), I may sometimes not be able to fully close this hand
  gripper. In such cases, I may defer this portion of the exercise to
  a later part of the day when it is warmer. Alternatively, I may do
  the exercise with an almost-closed rather than fully-closed
  position.

* Right hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 25 to 45
  seconds; if I were to start with the 100 lb instead of doing the 150
  lb first, I would be able to do more, but then I would not be able
  to do the 150 lb immediately aferward. That's why I start with the
  150 lb.

* Left hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 20 to 35
  seconds; if I were to start with the 100 lb instead of doing the 150
  lb first, I would be able to do over 20 seconds, but then I would
  not be able to do the 150 lb immediately aferward. That's why I
  start with the 150 lb.

I have generally switched away from doing multiple open/closes toward
doing a close-and-hold. The close-and-hold is harder, but also quicker
and more representative of a real-world situation (e.g., gripping
something that I can't afford to let go of). However, I might do
multiple open/closes outside of my daily routine.

### Second of alternating days (focus on building)

* Right hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 19 to 31
  seconds. I generally average about 22 to 28
  seconds.

  NOTE ADDED 2024-11-15: In cold weather, when my hands are cold
  (generally when the ambient temperature is below 16 degrees
  Celsius), I may sometimes not be able to fully close this hand
  gripper. In such cases, I may defer this portion of the exercise to
  a later part of the day when it is warmer. Alternatively, I may do
  the exercise with an almost-closed rather than fully-closed
  position.

* Left hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10 to 25
  seconds.

  NOTE ADDED 2024-11-15: In cold weather, when my hands are cold
  (generally when the ambient temperature is below 16 degrees
  Celsius), I may sometimes not be able to fully close this hand
  gripper. In such cases, I may defer this portion of the exercise to
  a later part of the day when it is warmer. Alternatively, I may do
  the exercise with an almost-closed rather than fully-closed
  position.

* Right hand on 100 lb with specific fingers excluded: The goal is to
  increase the strength in specific fingers while still using a total
  load that is not too much for my wrist, arm and shoulder, and neck
  muscles.

  * Excluding the little finger (if I do this first): I close and keep
    closed for 8 to 19 seconds. I should be able to do it, but it's
    much harder than using all fingers.

  * Excluding the index finger (if I do this second): I close and keep
    closed for 4 to 12 seconds. I should be able to do it, but it's
    much harder than using all fingers.

  If I do the index finger exclusion first, then I might be able to do
  longer than the expected duration for the index finger but shorter
  than the expected duration for the little finger.

* Left hand on 100 lb with specific fingers excluded: The goal is to
  increase the strength in specific fingers while still using a total
  load that is not too much for my wrist, arm and shoulder, and neck
  muscles.

  * Excluding the little finger: I should be able to close and hold
    for 1 to 2 seconds except in case of cold hands, but it's much
    harder than using all fingers.

  * Excluding the index finger: I am not able to do this consistently.

### Post-exercise relaxation

Particularly for the 200 lb attempts, I might feel muscle fatigue in
my hand, wrist, shoulder, or neck. I should make sure to massage the
area if so. I can also try head-and-neck strength exercises if I
continue feeling tight in the area.

### Reasons for skipping

* **Sickness or recent medical treatment**: See similar explanation
  for jogging.

* **Preemptive break to relax and conserve energy**: See similar
  explanation for jogging.

* **Hand injury**: If I have a cut on one of the hands, I want to skip
  the hand gripper exercises for that hand to avoid putting stress
  on the cut.

* **Preemptive break to improve hand appearance**: If there are
  particular reasons I really care about having good hands, I might
  take a break from the hand gripper; however, at this point since I
  am pretty comfortable with the 100 lb and 150 lb hand grippers, this
  is not a consideration. It was more of a concern when I was still
  new to these grippers.

## History

### Initial purchase on 2023-07-05

On July 5, 2023, I placed an order for a set of 3 hand grippers: 100
lb, 150 lb, and 200 lb. I picked the order up on July 8. However,
since I was still recovering from wisdom tooth removal at the time,
and then had antibiotic-induced digestive issues, I did not
immediately start using the hand grippers.

### Initial use on 2023-07-29

Eventually, on 2023-07-29, I started using the 100 lb hand gripper.

### Observations as of the first few days of using the 100 lb hand gripper

* I can crush the hand gripper fully and consistently when I use both
  hands, with my left hand on one side and my right hand on the other
  side.

* Generally, my right hand seems to have greater grip strength,
  *almost* fully crushing the hand gripper consistently. By my second
  day (2023-07-30) I was able to get my right hand to *fully* crush
  the hand gripper on the first try of each set of tries (e.g., if I
  would wait a few minutes and then try, the first try I would crush
  fully). But even so I was not able to crush it on the second try in
  *most* cases, and never on the third try.

### Update on 2023-08-08

By this time I can consistently and comfortably crush the 100 lb hand
gripper with my right hand. Also, I have been able to occasionally
fully crush the hand gripper with my left hand, but not consistently.

### Update on 2023-09-04

I took a break for a few days before after my wisdom tooth removal
(between Monday 2023-08-21 and Monday 2023-08-28). I resumed on
Tuesday 2023-08-29, but limited to one round per day.

On Monday 2023-09-04, I resumed the use of the 100 lb hand gripper for
multiple rounds a day. I found that now I can comfortably and
consistently close with both hands. With that said, it's still easier
with the right hand.

This led me to experiment (for the first time since I started using
the hand gripper) with the 150 lb hand gripper. Unsurprisingly, I
wasn't able to close this hand gripper with either hand (each hand
individually was only able to partially close up to the "vertical"
stage). With both hands together, I was able to close the 150 lb.

### Update on 2023-09-06

For the first time ever, I was able to close the 150 lb hand gripper
with my right hand. However, I was not able to repeat this feat
immediately. I expect to be able to repeat it sporadically over the
next week or so and to take at least a week before I can do a
consistent close with my right hand.

I felt pain in the area of my fingers that had pressed the gripper
after closing this; it was clearly effortful.

### Update on 2023-10-23 / 2023-10-24 / 2023-10-25

I am now occasionally just about able to close the 150 lb hand gripper
with my left hand. I can also now reasonably consistently close the
150 lb hand gripper with my right hand. I continue to be able to
comfortably close the 100 lb hand gripper with either hand, though
with the left hand it still is a bit displaced sometimes.

### Intermittently reduced right hand strength on 2023-10-27

On Friday 2023-10-27, I tried the hand gripper at 9 AM. I was able to
comfortably close the 100 lb with both hands, but was not able to
close the 150 lb with either hand. Whereas not being able to close it
with the left hand was as expected, not being able to close it with
the right hand was unexpected.

When I tried again shortly after 10 AM, the situation with my left
hand hadn't changed, but my right hand had further deteriorated, with
it just barely being able to close the 100 lb sometimes (and not even
being able to close it at other times).

I applied vaseline and waited a minute and tried again. The situation
had now reverted to what it had been around 9 AM: I could close 100 lb
comfortably with both hands, but I couldn't close 150 lb with either
hand.

I tried again after a minute, and now I was just barely able to close
the 150 lb with my right hand.

### Update on 2024-03-17

Starting this day, I am planning to do a daily practice of keeping the
100 lb hand gripper closed for at least 5 consecutive seconds with
each hand separately. 5 is about what I can reasonably do right
now. I'm hoping to increase it gradually to a larger amount, like 10
seconds.

### Update on 2024-05-07

As of now, I am generally able to keep the 100 lb hand gripper closed
in either hand for at least 10 seconds, and occasionally going up to
20 seconds, albeit with slight quivers (where it opens up a little bit
and I immediately close it back, in well under a second). For the 150
lb, with my right hand, I am able to keep it closed for about 3-5
seconds.

### Update on 2024-05-13

For the first time ever, I took out my 200 lb hand gripper and started
trying to close it. After a few attempts, I was able to get it to the
parallel position with each hand individually, but no further. I was
able to get it to close by wrapping one hand around another for the
last portion (from parallel to close).

### Update on 2024-08-02

For the last few weeks, I have switched to a practice of doing the 150
lb hand gripper and then the 100 lb hand gripper every morning, and
keeping them closed for several seconds.

This is the sequence I have been following:

* Right hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 4-10 seconds.

* Left hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 4-10 seconds.

* Right hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10-20
  seconds (generally about 15 seconds); if I were to start with the
  100 lb instead of doing the 150 lb first, I would be able to do over
  20 seconds, but then I would not be able to do the 150 lb
  immediately aferward. That's why I start with the 150 lb.

* Left hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10-20
  seconds (generally about 15 seconds); if I were to start with the
  100 lb instead of doing the 150 lb first, I would be able to do over
  20 seconds, but then I would not be able to do the 150 lb
  immediately aferward. That's why I start with the 150 lb.

### Update on 2024-09-09

The main change since the last update is a slight increase in the time
I can stay closed with the 150 lb.

Here is the protocol as of this time:

* Right hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 7-12 seconds.

* Left hand on 150 lb: I close and keep closed for about 7-12 seconds.

* Right hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10-20
  seconds (generally about 15 seconds); if I were to start with the
  100 lb instead of doing the 150 lb first, I would be able to do over
  20 seconds, but then I would not be able to do the 150 lb
  immediately aferward. That's why I start with the 150 lb.

* Left hand on 100 lb: I close and keep closed for about 10-20
  seconds (generally about 15 seconds); if I were to start with the
  100 lb instead of doing the 150 lb first, I would be able to do over
  20 seconds, but then I would not be able to do the 150 lb
  immediately aferward. That's why I start with the 150 lb.

### Update on 2024-09-22

I have decided to make the bundle of 150 lb and 100 lb exercises (that
are now at a maintain level) every alternate day, and on the other
alternate day, try the 200 lb, which is what I am trying to build to.

### Update on 2024-09-28

For the building exercises, I've created a more elaborate exercise for
the 200 lb, and added an exercise for 100 lb with specific fingers
excluded.

### Update on 2025-01-16

I made a few protocol updates on 2025-01-16 reflecting recent
improvements; I have now been recording privately my performance every
day, so I have a clearer picture of how well I am doing.

* I increased the range of durations that I am able to keep the hand
  gripper closed under various settings, to reflect recent
  improvements.

* I removed 200 lb from the protocol.

* I included closing 150 lb for the alternate days where I do the 100
  lb with a finger excluded; this reflects the new process I have been
  following *de facto*.

### Update on 2025-02-04

I made a few minor protocol tweaks:

* I increased the range of durations that I am able to keep the hand
  gripper closed for my right hand, reflecting recently observed
  increases. I did not update the range of durations for the left
  hand, as the included range seems to reflect recent performance
  reasonably accurately.

* I added the word "sometimes" to the point about failure to close the
  hand gripper when it is cold. This reflects the fact that in recent
  times, I have been able to close the hand gripper even in the
  morning (though it may have just been the case that my hands have
  not been as cold recently as they used to be).

### Update on 2025-02-28

I increased the range of durations that I am able to keep the hand
gripper closed with each hand, based on a review of data over the
past few weeks.
