# Jogging and return walking (with history)

## Goal of exercise

### Burn

I jog regularly to burn calories and get the relevant hormones
released that help me feel good. This makes it important to jog almost
every day. However, it is also important to not be dependent on
jogging for my mood. Various forced breaks from jogging, including a
15-day knee rest as well as breaks for things like vaccination and
other appointments, help keep me used to days without jogging.

### Maintain

I would like to maintain my existing physical stamina. Jogging is a
good way to do so.

### Why not build?

As of 2024-09, the amount I usually jog seems good enough for the
cardio portion of the physical stamina needs I expect to have in real
life. The dimensions along which I want to improve my physical stamina
further are not really ones that I expect to improve by jogging
further.

Another reason I don't want to overbuild on jogging is that regularly
jogging beyond the 2 miles (that is my current route) will increase my
time spent jogging. It will also increase my need for calorie intake,
which means spending more money and time preparing and eating
food. While this isn't a big downside, I don't see much compensating
upside.

With that said, I am definitely open to the possibility of jogging
more; just not striving in that direction.

## Current protocol for jogging and return walking

### Frequency: daily

I generally go for a jog + walk once a day.

### Usual route length and jogging/walking split

My usual route is about 1 mile (1.6 km) each way, for a total of 2
miles (3.2 km). The route is punctuated by intersections though none
with traffic lights and pretty much most of the route I have
pedestrian right of way. However, I do generally yield to others since
I'm generally not in a hurry to get anywhere, and if there are
significant traffic logjams I might change my route a little bit.

I aim to jog for the full duration of at least one way (1 mile) plus
some portion of the other way, totaling to somewhere between 1 and 2
miles. There may be portions where I have to slow down (e.g., when
crossing a road, or due to dogs or children nearby who might get
excited by somebody moving fast, or when cars are moving out of
parking spots).

The total distance I jog is generally in the range of 1.8-2.0 miles,
and the distance I walk back is generally in the range of 0-0.2
miles. In some cases, I may jog a little less, at around 1.75 miles,
generally due to slight fatigue. Also, in cases of slight fatigue, I
may pause jogging for a few seconds in between due to fatigue even
before getting to the 1.75 miles

Overall, one way (the first 1 mile, mostly jogging) takes me about
9-12 minutes and the return journey (mix of jogging and walking)
takes me about 12-15 minutes.

### Thresholds

My threshold for the minimum distance jogged, as updated on
2025-02-09, are as follows:

* Ideal conditions threshold: 1.67 miles

* Slightly degraded conditions threshold: 1.58 miles

* Significantly degraded conditions threshold: 1.5 miles

The ideal conditions threshold applies when I am system-wise healthy
(though I might have local issues) and don't have overexertion
fatigue, have been jogging regularly, and the temperature is in the
range of 13 to 20 degrees Celsius (55 to 68 degrees Fahrenheit). Note
that this threshold is still comfortably under the 1.75-2.0 miles that
I usually jog, so there's a decent amount of buffer, reducing the
pressure for me to feel the need to jog just to meet the threshold.

The slightly degraded conditions threshold applies when only one of these holds:

* I have skipped jogging for the past three or more days.

* I am recovering from a system-wide sickness.

* I have moderate fatigue from cognitive or physical overexertion or
  an emotionally stressful event yesterday or today.

* The temperature is slightly off from ideal -- either 8 to 13
  degrees Celsius (46 to 55 degrees Fahrenheit) or 20 to 25 degrees
  Celsius (68 to 77 degrees Fahrenheit).

The significant degraded conditions threshold applies when two or more
of the above conditions hold, or the temperature is below 8 degrees
Celsius or above 25 degrees Celsius.

I record in my exercise tracker file (for instance, [2024 exercise
tracker](2024-exercise-tracker.md) for 2024) when I skip jogging or
jog less than the threshold.

### Gap to meal

If I'm not doing strength exercises after returning, I generally try
to wait at least 45 minutes between my return and having a meal,
following [this](2021-01-10-ben-greenfield-hormesis.md). If I jogged
more and had a shorter return walk, I try to increase my wait time
accordingly, to at least an hour. Normally, the things I need to catch up with after my
return (such as email, messages, etc.)  effectively uses that time up.

### Abridged routes and potential reasons

In some rare cases, I do not go out the full 1 mile, but rather go out
a shorter distance, generally around half the distance (so 0.5 miles
each way, for a total of 1 mile). Depending on the exact reason, I
might jog fully *both ways* in case of an abridged route, or I might
still jog one way and walk the other. Below are some typical reasons:

* **Probability of rain or other bad weather conditions**: For
  probabilities of rain between 5% and 25%, if weather conditions are
  otherwise good, and if I can't go out at a different time, I might
  choose to go out but do an abridged route, with jogging in both
  directions. In some cases I might also do the abridged route *twice*
  so that I still get the same amount of exercise.

* **Time constraints**: I might need to get back for a meeting, and a
  later time of day wouldn't work for my jog. In such cases I'll do
  the abridged route, but try to jog back all the way to get the full
  amount of jogging.

* **Fatigue**: In some cases I don't feel physically or mentally able
  to do the full route, so I might do the abridged route; in such
  cases I will jog only one way and walk back. Kinds of fatigue
  include: mental fatigue, overall physical "energy level" fatigue,
  and knee/leg fatigue.

### Time of day for jogging

Outside of the winter months, I generally jog in the morning. The
exact time varies but it's usually between 8 AM and 11 AM. The total
duration is about 35-40 minutes (see jogging/walking breakdown
above). I generally jog after passing stool and doing a bit of work in
the morning (whether day job or other things) but before eating
anything. The reason for jogging in the morning is that it's generally
cooler (so better temperature-wise) and it also works well to get that
energy use done in the morning to feel better the whole day.

During the winter months, the mornings can be too cold, so I try to
jog in the afternoon, when it's warmest. This is generally sandwiched
between my meals, so after my morning meal but before my
afternoon/evening meal.

### Reasons for skipping

I have a few different reasons for skipping:

* **Currently raining or highly likely to rain**: Particularly during
  the winter months (around January and February, sometimes December
  and March) it can be raining heavily, or be highly likely to rain,
  throughout the day.

* **Other inclement weather conditions**: Examples include extreme
  heat, extreme cold, and air quality issues.

* **Time constraints during the parts of the day where I usually
  jog**: For instance, outside winter months, I might be unable to jog
  on days where I have a lot of meetings in the morning, Even though I
  might be freer in the afternoon on that day, it might be too hot in
  the afternoon. Similarly, in the winter months, being busy in the
  afternoon might mean I can't go.

* **Overall lack of time**: This could happen if I'm doing a project
  with a tight deadline, or for other reasons I want to work
  continuously on something to not lose my flow.

* **Fatigue**: In some cases, I skip jogging due to fatigue.  Kinds of
  fatigue include: mental fatigue, overall physical "energy level"
  fatigue, and knee/leg fatigue.

* **Sickness or recent medical treatment**: In some cases, I skip
  jogging because I am sick or have recently been sick, even if I am
  not explicitly feeling fatigued. Also, I might skip jogging for a
  day or two after receiving a vaccine or getting a dental procedure.

* **Preemptive break to relax and conserve energy**: If I have a
  medical or dental procedure later in the day, or the next day, I
  might skip jogging. This is to conserve energy and get to a relaxed
  state prior to the appointment, as well as reduce the risk of
  injuries or other challenges right before the appointment. The
  duration of preemptive break could be limited to same-day break or
  extend up to two days prior (more than two days is unlikely). This
  has the added benefit of freeing up some of my time for any other
  preparatory steps I need to take prior to the appointment.

* **Knee rest day**: I generally try to take a day off from jogging at
  least once every 15 days. So, if there's no break happening for any
  of the other reasons for 15 days, I will take a forced knee rest.

### Home jogging alternative

With home jogging, I jog in a small loop repeatedly for about 25 to 30
minutes at home, while in my socks (no shoes). More specifically, I
try to do at least 25 minutes (pushing myself to continue if I feel
like giving up before then) and go on to at most 30 minutes based on
my mood and time availability. However, in cases of time constraints,
I may shorten the duration based on the time constraints.

While not quite as diverse as outside jogging, it is good enough to
warm me up for strength exercises. It has the following advantages:

* It can be done when weather reasons prevent me from going outside
  for jogging, but these weather reasons don't apply inside the house
  (or apply to a lesser extent). Cold, wind, pollution, and rain are
  examples of such weather conditions. Extreme heat may apply both
  inside and outside the house.

  This is particularly relevant for situations where there is rain for
  several days at a stretch. I don't want to skip jogging and strength
  exercises for too many days at a stretch, so the home jogging
  alternative is worth considering for such situations.

* There is less overhead (such as getting my keys, wearing my shoes,
  etc.) so it can be fit in better when my schedule is tighter. In
  such cases, it may be a better alternative than a shorter jogging
  route as I get more quantity of exercise for reduced time.

* In cases where I need to be close to my computer for other reasons
  (for instance, something going on at work) home jogging may be a
  viable alternative.

## History with jogging

I've been interested in jogging ever since I was around nine or ten
years old. In fact, I used to jog a comparable amount to what I do now
(or even more!)  even back then.

With some lapses in Chicago during cold weather, I've mostly tried to
continue jogging regularly, with my jogging distances generally being
at least a mile, though in many cases I took haphazard paths which
makes measurement harder.

Starting May 2022, after moving to a new place, I standardized on a
specific jogging route which makes the measurement easier and allows
me to compare and track things better. The route is also optimized for
minimal interruption by traffic.

I initially started with a goal of at least 1 mile jogging + the
remainder of the 2-mile journey walking, with the return walking
punctuated by brief bursts of jogging.

Over time, I switched to at least the initial 1.25 miles jogging +
walking the remainder of the 2-mile total.

On 2024-05-29, based on recent data, I decided to increase my
threshold to the first 1.4 miles jogging + the remainder of the 2-mile
journey walking.

On 2024-09-27, I increased the baseline threshold to 1.5 miles but
included criteria for degraded thresholds of 1.4 miles and 1.25 miles
respectively.

On 2024-11-17, I increased the baseline threshold to 1.6 miles (from
1.5 miles) and also expanded the temperature range for baseline. I
also increased the degraded thresholds to 1.5 miles (from 1.4 miles)
and 1.4 miles (from 1.25 miles) respectively.

On 2024-11-20, I formally instituted home jogging as an alternative,
and gave it a try.

On 2025-02-09, I updated the distance thresholds for jogging as well
as the duration of home jogging based on recent changes, and also made
a few edits to the document for clarity. The distance thresholds were
increased from (1.6 miles, 1.5 miles, 1.4 miles) to (1.67 miles, 1.58
miles, 1.5 miles). I did not change the expected jogging range of
1.75-2.0 miles. The home jogging duration range was increased from (20
to 25 minutes, with 20 minute as minimum) to (25 to 30 minutes, with
25 minutes as minimum).
