# Push-ups (with history)

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

Push-ups are good for upper body strength, both abdomen/torso area and
arms and hands.

Based on guidelines such as
[this](https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/fitness/in-depth/fitness/art-20046433),
my current aim is to ramp up to 25 standard push-ups (see the standard
exercise description below) without getting out of the push-up
position (but allowing stretch breaks while staying in
position. While I don't have concrete goals for variants, I also hope
to explore other kinds of push-ups including knuckle push-ups, wrist
push-ups, and finger push-ups.

## Current protocol

I generally do push-ups after [weight-lifting
exercises](weight-lifting-exercises-with-history.md). I do this set
once every 3 days.

### Standard exercise: palm, toes, both hands and both feet, normal hand spacing, nose touch

For my standard push-up, I follow this protocol:

* Palm for upper support (as opposed to wrist, fist, knuckle, and fingers)

* Toes for lower support (as opposed to knees)

* Both hands (as opposed to one hand)

* Both feet (as opposed to one foot)

* Normal hand spacing (as opposed to reduced or increased hand spacing)

* Nose touch to count a complete push-up

To count a pushup, I require my nose to touch the exercise mat. As the
mat can curl up a bit, the level can be about 1-2 inches above the
level of my hands.

I generally stay in the push-up position through the full set. I do 4-8
repetitions and then break (while staying in the pushup position) for
leg stretches. Then I continue with the pushups.

The number of push-ups I can manage can vary quite a bit. When I'm
feeling low on energy, it's in the range of 10-15. When I am higher on
energy, it's in the range of 17-22.

### Fist push-ups

Fist push-ups are similar to standard push-ups with just one change:
for upper body support, instead of resting on my palm, I rest on my
fist, specifically, the portion between the MCP and PIP joints.

Starting 2025-06-25, I try to do a few fist push-ups. I might do them
either before or after standard push-ups.

The number of fist push-ups is in the range of 5 to 10. The number is
at the high end of the range if I do fist push-ups before standard
push-ups, and at the low end of the range if I do standard push-ups
before fist push-ups.

## History

### 2021-11-02: start of push-ups

On 2021-11-02, I started push-ups along with weight-lifting
exercises. At the time of starting, I was only able to do about 2-3
push-ups.

### By late 2022 or early 2023: about 13 to 22 push-ups

By late 2022 or early 2023, I had reached a level of about 13 to 22
push-ups (with a range of 10 to 15 when a little fatigued and a range
of 17 to 22 when more energetic). Since then, and until about
2024-11-14, my count of push-ups has stayed roughly the same.

The lack of improvement in push-ups since early 2023 may be partly
because I do push-ups after jogging and weight-lifting, so while on
the one hand I am sufficiently warmed up, on the other hand I am also
more fatigued. However, if I can increase my number of push-ups under
these conditions to about 25, then I should be in good shape.

### 2025-06-25: fist push-ups

As a prelude to fist push-ups, on 2025-03-17, 2025-04-19, and
2025-05-21, I stayed in the push-up flank position on my fists instead
of my palm for a few seconds.

Starting Wednesday 2025-06-25, I started doing a few fist push-ups.

On 2025-06-25 and 2025-06-29, I did fist push-ups after regular
push-ups and on both days I could do 2 fist push-ups.

On 2025-07-02, I did fist push-ups before regular push-ups and I
managed 5 fist push-ups followed by 13 regular push-ups.

### 2025-10-24: fist push-ups update

As of 2025-10-24, I am generally able to do somewhere between 6 and 9
fist push-ups. The total number of fist push-ups and standard push-ups
is 13 or more, but can vary quite a bit. I expect that this number is
lower than it would be if I did push-ups before strength exercises,
and the continued increase in number of repetitions for strength
exercises has been creating more of a squeeze on the number of
push-ups.
