# Standing on one leg toes with eyes open (with history)

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

This is an experimental exercise for which I was not able to obtain
any standard benchmarks for comparison. So, I am uncertain about the
goals and functional relevance.

### Increasing the duration should help with balance and prediction of balance

This is similar to [standing on heels with eyes
open](standing-on-heels-with-eyes-open-with-history.md) in that there
is very little surface area of contact so I need to get on the right
footing and stay on that right footing in order to keep my center of
gravity over that narrow area. This requires good balance and good
prediction and estimation of balance.

### Goal: build towards 30 seconds

The goal is to build to where I can stand on one leg toes with eyes
open to about 30 seconds for each leg.

## Protocol

The protocol is to stand on the toes of one leg with eyes open for as
long as possible. It's okay to do multiple tries and record them
all. Tries that immediately abort (in less than 2 seconds) can be
skipped, but if I abort more than three tries successively I should
document this.

I should do up to five tries on each leg. I can stop if I hit the
threshold of 10 seconds on any try.

## Triggers for overall exercise

The practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.

The other exercises I do along with this are
[standing-on-heels-with-eyes-open](standing-on-heels-with-eyes-open-with-history.md)
and [dorsiflexion and plantar
flexion](dorsiflexion-and-plantar-flexion-exercises-with-history.md).

## History

### History of threshold durations

I started doing this exercise on Sunday 2025-06-22.

On 2025-06-26, I documented the exercise and set the threshold as 10
seconds.

### History of triggers for overall exercise

#### Settings 2025-06-22 to 2025-07-04

I started doing this exercise on Friday 2025-06-20, generally as a
followup to [standing on one leg with eyes
closed](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md). The
stipulations regarding the conditions under which to do the
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise apply to this exercise
as well.

#### Settings 2025-07-05 to end of July 2025

Starting 2025-07-05, I switched to doing this exercise on the
alternating days among days I skip strength exercises.

#### Settings 2025-10-13 onward

In August and September 2025, I was very erratic with doing this
exercise, partly as a result of a general squeeze on exercise time due
to things being busy. Specifically, in light of the [best practices
around exercise adjustment during hectic
times](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-exercise-adjustment-during-hectic-times.md#balance-exercises-and-other-niche-exercises),
I deprioritized this exercise during the hectic t imes.

The few times I was able to do the exercise were mostly during rice
prep, while waiting for water to be filtered by the water filter
before putting it on the rice. This eventually led me to decide to
just do this exercise during that time in general. The previous
exercise frequency was once every alternating period of 3 days (so
effectively once every 6 days). If I switched over to doing this
exercise at every alternating rice prep, that would roughly be once
every 7 to 9 days, which is a little less frequent, but probably fine.

So the practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.
