# Standing on one leg with eyes open (with history)

This is a complementary exercise to [standing on one leg with eyes
closed](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md) that I
do more rarely.

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Maintain standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-open for at least 5 minutes

The exercise of standing on one leg with eyes open is complementary to
the exercise of standing on one leg with eyes closed. The main
difference is that whereas the eyes-closed version is primarily
constrained on balance (i.e., loss of balance is the main reason for
ending in most cases), the eyes-open version is primarily constrained
on the strength and stamina of the leg. With that said, there does
seem to be a positive correlation between the two exercises.

My goal is to maintain my current ability to stand on one leg with
eyes open for at least 5 minutes on each leg. Since this is with eyes
open, I can multiplex this with watching a video as long as I don't
need to interact with it by clicking on stuff.

The main benefits are as follows:

* This exercise improves the strength of my legs, including the heels,
  ankles, knees, etc. This increased strength is most useful for
  standing for long durations without a lot of ability to move around
  (something I do not do organically but may sometimes need to do) but
  also somewhat useful for walking and running.

* The exercise makes sure that a single leg can sustain the weight of
  my whole body for a moderately long period of time. This offers
  insurance against the possibility of one leg being injured to a
  point where it either can't be used or is preferable to not use. In
  that respect, the exercise plays a similar role as
  [hopping](hopping-with-history.md), with hopping being the dynamic
  version (one-legged walking) and this being the static version
  (one-legged standing).

* While mainly constrained on strength and stamina, this exercise does
  improve balance in a more real-world setting than the eyes-closed
  version. Anecdotally, it feels like doing the eyes-open exercise
  does seem to result in improvements in the eyes-closed version.

The threshold of 5 minutes is a bit arbitrary, and mainly stems from a
need to balance the time and energy expenditure against the value of
the exercise. I can imagine raising the theshold a bit over time,
though it's unlikely to go beyond 10 minutes.

## Protocol

I raise one leg while keeping the other on the floor, then stand in
that position with my eyes open for as long as I can sustain,
maintaining my strength and balance. I do this first standing on the
right leg, then after being done with it, do it on the left leg.

## Frequency

My aim is to do this exercise about once a month on each leg. If I am
not able to clear the threshold of 5 minutes on either leg, I may
repeat that particular leg the next day.

## History

### Initial weekly frequency with a 2-minute goal but not actually done regularly (2021-2024)

This exercise was initially noted as part of the guidance for the
[standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed
exercise](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md) as
something to do weekly, but I wasn't actually doing it every week; I
tended to only do it when I had trouble with the eyes-closed version,
and I effectivelly stopped doing the eyes-open version as a result.

At this time, my goal was to manage at least 2 minutes on each leg.

### Switch to monthly frequency starting 2024-11-30

Starting 2024-11-30, I switched the exercise to monthly frequency,
while maintaining the goal of a 2-minute frequency.

### Separate exercise document and increase in duration threshold to 4 minutes on 2025-02-19

On 2025-02-19, after successfully doing the exercise for over 4
minutes on each leg, I increased the duration threshold to 4 minutes
for each leg. I also decided to make a separate document for the
eyes-open exercise (the one you are reading right now); previously, it
had only been mentioned tangentially at the end of the eyes-closed
exercise's document.

### Duration threshold increase to 5 minutes on 2025-07-09

On Wednesday 2025-07-09, after successfully exceeding 5 minutes on
both legs for the second time (the previous successful attempts over 5
minutes had been in April 2025, and prior to that I had exceeded 5
minutes on the right leg but not the left leg on 2025-03-28) I
increased the duration threshold for both legs to 5 minutes.
