# Standing on toes with eyes closed (with history)

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Maintain standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed duration at at least 50 seconds

The ability to sustain weight on toes is important for balance, as we
lift off from our toes, and when jogging, we are lifting off from the
toes of just one foot. The eyes-closed version of the exercise just
raises the stakes so as to get more bang per second of exercise.

When I started standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed on 2024-09-09, I set
a threshold of 15 seconds. Even this threshold, I was not able to
consistently clear on the first try, leading to me doing 3 or 5 tries
on many days. As of 2025-04-12 the threshold is 50 seconds.

I don't have standard benchmarks for this, but I think a threshold of
50 seconds is reasonable and I don't have plans to increase the
threshold, though if my performance continues to improve organically,
I may increase the threshold further.

## Protocol

* Stand on my toes (both feet). Both the toes and the portion of the
  foot right before the toe can be in contact with the ground.

* Close my eyes when the seconds counter hits a multiple of 5; note
  the current time.

* Try to stay in that position for as long as
  possible, without repositioning either foot. Lifting or sliding
  either foot is not allowed, and contact of the rest of the foot with
  the floor is also not allowed. A little bit of rocking is permitted.
  Continue to try to stand until I lose balance and have to lift one
  of my feet and place it elsewhere; open my eyes and note the elapsed
  time.

My goal is to keep trying (up to 5 attempts) until I clear the
threshold on at least one attempt.

Prior to 2024-11-19, I was using median instead of maximum, but
maximum makes more sense given the increased threshold.

## Triggers for overall exercise

I've been doing this exercise daily starting Monday 2024-09-09,
generally as a followup to [standing on one leg with eyes
closed](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md). The
stipulations regarding the conditions under which to do the
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise apply to this exercise
as well.

## History

When I started on 2024-09-09, I set a threshold of 15 seconds.

On 2024-10-14, I increased the threshold to 18 seconds.

On 2024-11-05, I increased the threshold to 21 seconds.

On 2024-11-17, I increased the threshold to 24 seconds.

On 2025-01-16, I increased the threshold to 27 seconds.

On 2025-02-03, I increased the threshold to 30 seconds.

On 2025-03-06, I increased the threshold to 35 seconds in light of
recent good performance across several rounds of trying. I think in
principle I could increase the threshold to 40 seconds but I want to
be cautious and stay at under 20% for each incremental change so I
have time to observe for a while if the new threshold works across
days.

On 2025-04-12, I increased the threshold to 50 seconds.
