# Standing on one leg with eyes closed (with history)

I've been doing exercises involving standing on one leg with eyes
closed for a while (likely since at least November 2021 when I started
weights), but on 2023-10-29 (and starting with information/practices
that I started collecting 2023-10-28) I've decided to flesh out the
practice and some variants of it.

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

### Maintain standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed for at least 66 seconds (with adjustment for temperature)

Standing on one leg with eyes closed is a widely recommended balance
exercise. Empirically, I have found that the exercise has helped
improve my balance, but I am well past the point where it has any
clear benefits on my day-to-day balance. So the next question is how I
compare to age-based norms.

According to
[this](https://www.matassessment.com/blog/single-leg-balance-eyes-closed),
the range for men ages 20-39 is 19.3 to 34.8 seconds (average of 21
seconds) and the range for men ages 40-59 is 11.5 to 26.9 seconds
(average of 18.3 seconds. As somebody in my late 30s (as of 2024), my
threshold is at least 66 seconds per leg with temperature adjustment,
and in practice I do between 60 and 100 seconds on the first try most
of the time.

At this point, it's not clear that increasing the duration has
real-world effects either in practice or in theory, and time spent
standing with eyes closed can't be multiplexed with other things, so
my plan is to sustain the minimum of 66 seconds for
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed without trying to push the level
up. Time considerations make it dificult to push the threshold too far
up, even if I am eventually able to do clearly over 66 seconds.

From my perspective, the key is to prevent age-induced decline. Given
that I've increased the threshold from 10 seconds to 66 seconds over a
period of about 1.5 years, I think just being able to maintain at 66
seconds should be good enough.

For the goal of improving balance more generally, doing other balance
exercises, such as
[standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed](standing-on-toes-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md),
is likely to have higher payoff.

## Standing on one leg with eyes closed: standard version

### Single iteration standard version, specific leg

The standard version of the exercise is as follows:

* Lift and fold one leg with my eyes open, facing my laptop

* Wait a few seconds to stabilize

* When the seconds counter on my laptop hits a multiple of 5, close my
  eyes, mentally noting the start time

* Try to stay balanced for as long as possible until I get fatigued or
  lose my balance

* When opening my eyes, immediately note the end time and calculate
  the difference

### Full iteration standard version, single leg

### Threshold duration (currently 66 seconds with adjustments for colder temperatures)

Starting 2025-03-03, the threshold duration is as follows:

* Baseline of 66 seconds

* If the temperature is 20 degrees Celsius or higher, no
  adjustment. If the temperature is greater than 0 degrees Celsius and
  less than 20 degrees Celsius, then 6 + three times the temperature
  in degrees Celsius (in seconds). For instance, if the temperature is
  10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 36 seconds.

### How the threshold duration is used

If I don't clear the threshold duration on my first attempt, I
continue to do attempts until I clear the threshold on any
attempt. The maximum number of attempts is 5.

NOTE: Prior to 2024-11-19, I was using the median across attempts
rather than the maximum. With the significantly increased threshold,
using the maximum makes sense and helps make sure I don't end up
spending several minutes on this exercise. The median made sense in
the past when the threshold was lower.

### Full retry

If I fail the full iteration, i.e., even after 5 attempts, I do not
clear the threshold, this is likely due to temporary stability
issues. The most common reason is sleepy or trembling legs; this could
be due to ambient cold temperatures or having been seated too long.

In such a case, I should stand *with my eyes open* for up to two
minutes (i.e., either a full two minutes or however long I can stand)
on the same leg where I've failed. After success with that, I should
again retry the full iteration. (This retry might succeed at the first
try if I exceed the threshold on the first try).

### Overall exercise: both legs

For the overall exercise, I do the above for one leg, then after
completion I do it for the other leg.

### Triggers for overall exercise

I do the exercise about once every 3 days, on the day that I am not
doing strength exercises.

## History

### History of threshold durations

* Prior to 2023-10-28, the de facto threshold duration was 10 seconds

* Starting 2023-10-28, the threshold duration was increased to 12
  seconds

* Starting 2023-11-18, the threshold duration was increased to 14
  seconds

* Starting 2024-01-18, I followed this rule:

  * Baseline of 18 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (18 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. For every degree celsius
    that the indoor temperature is less than 20 degrees Celsius (68
    degrees Fahrenheit), I subtract 1 second.  For instance, if the
    indoor temperature is 15 degrees Celsius (59 degrees Fahrenheit),
    my target is 18 - (20 - 15) = 13 seconds.

  This temperature-dependence is based on the observation that my
  ability to stand on one leg with eyes closed is harder at colder
  temperatures.

* Starting 2024-05-07, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 20
  seconds, as I pretty consistently exceed 20 seconds on the first try
  nowadays. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 20 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (20 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than 0 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then the temperature rounded down in degrees Celsius. If the
    temperature is less than 0 degrees Celsius, I shouldn't be doing
    this exercise!

* Starting 2024-07-15, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 23
  seconds, as I pretty consistently exceed 23 seconds on the first try
  nowadays. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 23 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (23 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than -3 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then 3 + the temperature rounded down in degrees Celsius. If the
    temperature is less than -3 degrees Celsius, I shouldn't be doing
    this exercise!

* Starting 2024-08-08, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 27
  seconds, as I pretty consistently exceed 27 seconds on the first try
  nowadays. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 27 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (27 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than -7 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then 7 + the temperature rounded down in degrees Celsius. If the
    temperature is less than -7 degrees Celsius, I shouldn't be doing
    this exercise!

* Starting 2024-09-09, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 30
  seconds, as I pretty consistently exceed 30 seconds on the first try
  nowadays. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 30 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (30 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than -10 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then 10 + the temperature rounded down in degrees Celsius. If the
    temperature is less than -10 degrees Celsius, I shouldn't be doing
    this exercise!

* Starting 2024-09-27, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 32
  seconds, as I pretty consistently exceed 32 seconds on the first try
  nowadays. I am also doubling the magnitude of temperature-based
  adjustment. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 32 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (32 seconds remains the target).

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than 4 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius - 8. For instance,
    if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 12. For
    temperatures of less than 4 degrees Celsius, I should skip this
    exercise or do it with no threshold expectation.

* Starting 2024-10-17, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 34
  seconds. After many tries I've found about 35-36 seconds to be the
  lowest outside of cases of sudden balance loss, so a baseline of 34
  seconds will likely work. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 34 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (34 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than 3 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius - 6. For instance,
    if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 14. For
    temperatures of less than 3 degrees Celsius, I should skip this
    exercise or do it with no threshold expectation.

* Starting 2024-11-05, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 36
  seconds. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 36 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (36 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than 2 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius - 4. For instance,
    if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 14. For
    temperatures of 2 degrees Celsius or less, I should skip this
    exercise or do it with no threshold expectation.

* Starting 2024-11-17, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 40
  seconds. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 40 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (40 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than 0 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius (in seconds). For
    instance, if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold
    is 20 seconds. For temperatures of 0 degrees Celsius or less, I
    should skip this exercise or do it with no threshold expectation.

* Starting 2025-01-16, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 44
  seconds. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 44 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (44 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than -2 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius plus 4 (in
    seconds). For instance, if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius,
    the threshold is 24 seconds. For temperatures of -2 degrees
    Celsius or less, I should skip this exercise or do it with no
    threshold expectation.

* Starting 2025-01-21, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 50
  seconds. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 50 seconds

  * If I am doing the exercise after I return from jogging, no
    adjustment (50 seconds remains the target)

  * If I am doing the exercise without jogging or similar warmup, then
    temperature-based adjustment as follows. If the temperature is 20
    degrees Celsius or higher, no adjustment. If the temperature is
    greater than -5 degrees Celsius and less than 20 degrees Celsius,
    then twice the temperature in degrees Celsius plus 10 (in
    seconds). For instance, if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius,
    the threshold is 30 seconds. For temperatures of -5 degrees
    Celsius or less, I should skip this exercise or do it with no
    threshold expectation.

* Starting 2025-02-03, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 60
  seconds, but also increasing the temperature-based adjustment to 3
  seconds for every degree Celsius. I am also removing the "return
  from jogging" exemption. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 60 seconds

  * If the temperature is 20 degrees Celsius or higher, no
    adjustment. If the temperature is greater than 0 degrees Celsius
    and less than 20 degrees Celsius, then three times the temperature
    in degrees Celsius (in seconds). For instance, if the temperature
    is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 30 seconds.

* Starting 2025-03-03, I am increasing the baseline threshold to 66
  seconds. The new logic is:

  * Baseline of 66 seconds

  * If the temperature is 20 degrees Celsius or higher, no
    adjustment. If the temperature is greater than 0 degrees Celsius
    and less than 20 degrees Celsius, then 6 + three times the temperature
    in degrees Celsius (in seconds). For instance, if the temperature
    is 10 degrees Celsius, the threshold is 36 seconds.

### History of triggers for overall exercise

#### Settings prior to 2024-11-30

I should do the overall exercise once before going out jogging, and
once after coming back from jogging and before any strength
exercises. If I'm doing strength exercises without having gone
jogging, I should make sure to do the overall exercise before strength
exercise.

If I do not plan to do strength exercises after returning from
jogging, and I already did the standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed
exercise successfully on the first try before leaving, I may or may
not do the standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise; it depends
on my mood and time availability. However, if I was shaky with the
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise when I did it before
going jogging, it's a good idea to do it after returning to verify
that my balance is fine after the warmup of jogging (this is
particularly relevant for colder months).

On days where I cannot go jogging and am not doing strength exercises
due to fatigue, sickness, time constraints, or weather, I should
consider doing the standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise if
I'm feeling minimally healthy enough and the time constraints are not
super-severe.

I might also discretionarily do the
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed at other times of the day.

#### Settings 2024-11-30 to 2025-01-19

From 2024-11-30 onward, in order to save time, particularly in the
morning when time may be more scarce, I am making the following
change:

* I do the standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise prior to
  jogging *only* on days where I don't plan to do weight-lifting and
  push-ups after returning from jogging.

* I'll continue to do the standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed
  exercise after joggging and before weight-lifting.

The net effect of this change is that rather than doing the exercise
an average of 1.5 times a day (twice on days when I do weight-lifting
(before and after jogging) and once on other days, I now do the
exercise just once per day. While the total time saved is about 2-3
minutes which is not much, saving that time before going jogging gives
me a bit more flexibility insofar as it gets my exercise finished
sooner, which in turn unblocks me to eat sooner and do other post-meal
activities sooner.

The motivation for this change is that at this point, I have hit a
level that I only wish to maintain, not build from. My guess is that
doing the exercise once a day is sufficient for the goal of
maintaining (in fact I may be able to build even doing it once a day,
so further reduction in the future may also happen).

The other notes about the exercise remain unchanged.

#### Settings 2025-01-20 onward

In light of good and improving performance on the exercise, I am
reducing the frequency to do it (before jogging) to the days that I am
not doing either of the strength exercise sets (i.e., either weight
lifting + push-ups or dead hang + pull-ups). This will make the
frequency about one every three days. The goal of this change is to
reduce my total exercise time, particularly on the days where it's
longer, and as a side-effect also make it more equal across days. If I
find deterioration from this reduced frequency, I might increase the
frequency to two out of three days.
