# Standing on heels with eyes open (with history)

## Goal and functional relevance of exercise

This is an experimental exercise for which I was not able to obtain
any standard benchmarks for comparison. So, I am uncertain about the
goals and functional relevance.

Two main benefits come to mind.

### Increasing the duration helps with relatively tricky forms of upper body balance and stability

Unlike the case of standing on toes, where there is a wide surface
area offering more optionality for how to balance, standing on heels
is trickier because the surface area of contact is very small, and
it's very hard to keep the center of gravity consistently above this
surface area of contact.

There are two ways. One is to luck into a really good starting
configuration and then not move at all, which requires a lot of luck
and endurance. I find it hard to maintain that level of stability for
more than a few seconds.

The other is to fall and readjust quickly while falling.

Unlike cases of standing on one leg or on toes, where a strong leg and
strong toes respectively help with relative weight redistribution to
compensate for upper body movement, here the game is almost entirely
about upper body balance and stability.

### Graceful failure is useful training for catching myself when I slip

When I do end up failing, it's important to fail gracefully, i.e., not
fall down. Normally, I don't get practice of this because I don't get
in situations where my balance situation is this bad, but deliberately
trying to stay in this unstable position for a while produces
interesting failure cases.

### Tentative goal: 3-second minimum and 10-second maximum over two minutes of trying

My tentative goal is to target a minimum over tries of at least 3
seconds and a maximum over tries of at least 10 seconds for as many
tries as I can do over a period of two minutes. Recording both a
minimum and a maximum is in recognition of the significant variation
based on factors of luck including the starting configuration.

## Protocol

The protocol is to try as many attempts to stand on heels with eyes
open over a period of about two minutes, allowing for a gap / rest /
readjustment period between attempts of up to five seconds. Aborted
starts can be included in that period.

I then record the minimum and maximum over all the attempts over the
two-minute period. My goal is to try to get as high a minimum and as
high a maximum as possible.

## Triggers for overall exercise

The practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.

The other exercises I do along with this are
[standing-on-one-leg-toes-with-eyes-open](standing-on-one-leg-toes-with-eyes-open-with-history.md)
and [dorsiflexion and plantar
flexion](dorsiflexion-and-plantar-flexion-exercises-with-history.md).

## History

### History of threshold durations

#### First attempt on Friday 2025-06-20 and followup plus formalization on Sunday 2025-06-22

I made my first recorded attempt on Friday 2025-06-20. I was able to
achieve a max of 8 to 9 seconds at least once with a bit of forward
leaning and a wide leg spread. I did not record the minimum but I
think it was around 2 seconds.

I tried again on Sunday 2025-06-22, getting a minimum of about 2
seconds and a maximum of about 7 seconds. I also formalized the
exercise structure on this day, including setting conventions on
overall duration and recording of minimum and maximum.

### History of triggers for overall exercise

#### Settings 2025-06-20 to 2025-07-04

I started doing this exercise on Friday 2025-06-20, generally as a
followup to [standing on one leg with eyes
closed](standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed-with-history.md). The
stipulations regarding the conditions under which to do the
standing-on-one-leg-with-eyes-closed exercise apply to this exercise
as well.

#### Settings 2025-07-05 to end of July 2025

Starting 2025-07-05, I switched to doing this exercise on the
alternating days among days I skip strength exercises.

#### Settings 2025-10-13 onward

In August and September 2025, I was very erratic with doing this
exercise, partly as a result of a general squeeze on exercise time due
to things being busy. Specifically, in light of the [best practices
around exercise adjustment during hectic
times](../../best-practices/best-practices-around-exercise-adjustment-during-hectic-times.md#balance-exercises-and-other-niche-exercises),
I deprioritized this exercise during the hectic t imes.

The few times I was able to do the exercise were mostly during rice
prep, while waiting for water to be filtered by the water filter
before putting it on the rice. This eventually led me to decide to
just do this exercise during that time in general. The previous
exercise frequency was once every alternating period of 3 days (so
effectively once every 6 days). If I switched over to doing this
exercise at every alternating rice prep, that would roughly be once
every 7 to 9 days, which is a little less frequent, but probably fine.

So the practice 2025-10-13 onward is to do this exercise roughly every
alternating rice prep, so about once every 7 to 9 days. With that
said, some rice preps I might use for more niche occasional exercises,
which might displace a few slots, so effectively this might be a
little less frequent.
