# 2021-10-29 eye exam

A few weeks ago, I made an appointment for an eye examination. I had
not had an eye examination for over 10 years, so it was time to get
one. The exam was scheduled for Friday, October 29, 2021, at noon (12
PM) at the Tang Center on 2222 Bancroft Avenue, Berkeley. This area is
part of the University of California, Berkeley.

My examination was done by optometry intern Justin Nguyen under the
guidance of attending doctor Chris Willmer.

## Prep and journey (11:25 AM to 11:45 AM)

### Sunglasses did not arrive in time

I had tried to purchase sunglasses from the nearby Target and did not
find them. I then ordered them from Amazon but they did not arrive in
time for my eye appointment.

### I took my cap and umbrella for protection

I took my cap and an umbrella to protect me for the post-dilation
increased sensitivity to light.

### Taking BART

Although the location was about 25 minutes walking distance, I took
the BART from North Berkeley to downtown Berkeley when going to the
appointment, to reduce my sun exposure ahead of the appointment
(limiting it to about 10 minutes instead of 25). I planned to take
BART back too.

## Check-in (11:45 AM to noon)

Based on guidance and signage, I entered the building from the Durant
Avenue side.

### COVID-19 screening and masking

At a front desk outside the building, the front desk staff asked if I
did my daily screening. I seemed confused, and they asked me if I was
a student. When I replied in the negative, they pointed me to a set of
symptoms to see if I had any in the past day. I confirmed I hadn't,
and also confirmed that I had been fully vaccinated. They gave me a
surgical mask that I wore on top of my KN95 mask. They told me to go
to the third floor.

### Kiosk check-in

When I reached the optometry clinic, the front desk staff asked me to
check in at the kiosk. I finished the check-in at the kiosk and made
the initial payment of $114. I then sat down and waited for my
appointment to begin.

### Call in

Justin Nguyen, the optometry intern who would be examining me, called
me in to a room to start the optometry appointment.

### Hand washing

I was asked to do hospital-style handwashing inside the examination
room before starting the eye exam.

## Examination (noon to about 2 PM)

### Initial questions

Justin asked me a bunch of questions related to my health, including
family history, and recorded notes. He also asked questions
specifically about my optical health.

I told him I hadn't had an eye exam for ~10 years and my last physical
was over 4 years ago (actually in December 2016, but he wrote down
2017 and I said ok). I mentioned family history of glaucoma and also
talked about my photosensitivity. Outside optical history, I also,
when prompted, shared information about diabetes and high blood
pressure in my family.

### Eye charts

I was then made to try to read several eye charts at different
magnifications and different forms of blurring and light
contrast. Justin made some notes about my near and far vision and my
glasses prescription.

### Looking into the eye

Justin used an ophthalmoscope to look a bit into my eye. He then took
some time to go out and discuss with the attending doctor (Chris
Willmer).

He came back and gave the assessment so far: I have a little trouble
with my distance vision, but not enough to need glasses. For
photosensitivity, he gave standard suggestions of blue-light-blocking
glasses, dimming screens, and using dimmer, softer, warmer lights.

### Peripheral vision check

I was taken to another room where my peripheral vision was checked
using a game. The game made me look at a black dot in the center and
had me click whenever there was a flicker elsewhere on the
screen. Looking
[here](https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-prevention/visual-field-testing),
this is called an automated static perimetry test.

### Dye and further looking

Justin then added a dye and looked a bit more. The goal here was to do
a bit of a sanity check to see if it was safe to use the dilation
fluid.

### Dilation and waiting time

Justin then added some dilation fluid. Since I tended to close my eyes
before he could put enough of the fluid, he adopted an approach where
he put it right at the corner of my eye with my eye closed, and then
asked me to blink 10-20 messages.

While waiting for the dilation fluid to be absorbed by the eye (which
takes about 15 minutes) Justin took my blood pressure reading. I asked
him if there was any relation between eye exams and blood pressure. He
said no. I think it was just a way to pass the time while waiting for
the dilation to happen, though I didn't bluntly ask him if that was
the case. My reading came to 102/67.

### Deep eye examination

Once the fluid was in, he did further examination. He asked me to look
at specific places and peered into my eyes with his ophthalmoscope.

### Attending doctor review

The attending doctor Chris Willmer came and did another round of
review. She also did a similar exercise of asking me to look in
specific places and peered into my eye using an ophthalmoscope.

After that, she and Justin explained that the nervous structure of my
two eyes is different: the size ratio of the inner disk in my eye and
the outer disk in my eye was quite different between the eyes (in the
right eye, the inner disk was a larger proportion of the outer
disk). They recommended I get fundus photography of my two eyes for
$20. This photograph could then be compared with future visits to see
if the structure of either eye was changing. Structural changes could
be indicative oof glaucoma.

### Fundus photography

Justin took me to another room for fundus photography of my two
eyes. After the photography was finished, he let me take photos of the
photos with my phone.

Photos:

* [Left eye](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/reports/20211029-left-eye-fundus.jpg)
* [Right eye](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/reports/20211029-right-eye-fundus.jpg)

## Examination summary

[Report](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/master/reports/20211029-eye-exam-results.jpg)

### Complaint / POV

Purpose of Visit: Photosensitive at night

### Diagnosis

1. H52.13: MYOPIA, OU
2. H52.222: ASTIGMATISM, REGULAR , US

### Assessment

1. Myopia OU, Astigmatism regular OS
2. Asymmetric ONH OD>OS
   -C/D OD: 0.5/0.6, OS: 0.45/0.45

### Plan

1. Released updated distance Rx for general use. DWP benefit of blue
   light filters and switching to warmer light hues for photosensitivity.
2. Fundus potos taken, monitor yearly.

RTC 1 year for GEE or sooner prn

### Refraction

These were my readings; OD stands for oculus dextrus, meaning right
eye, and OS stands for oculus sinister, meaning left eye.

Label | Sphere | Cylinder | Axis | VA
-- | -- | -- | -- | --
OD | -0.75 | | | 20/15-1
OS | -0.5 | -0.5 | 037 | 20/15-3

## Further discussion

### Asymmetry between the eyes

The doctors explained that because my eyes did not have similar
inner/outer disk ratios, it would be good to have photos on file
(using fundus photography) so that the trends in both eyes could be
monitored. Having different ratios between the eyes is not itself a
problem, but changing ratios over time could indicate glaucoma.

I asked if there was any indication/suggestion that I had glaucoma,
and they said no, it was highly unlikely at my age and there are no
other indications based on my vision. The asymmetry did not put me at
greater risk -- it could just be confusing in the future to people if
we didn't have the fundus photographs on file to show what the
asymmetry looked like to begin with.

### Photosensitivity

I asked for the doctors' opinions on photosensitivity. I mentioned its
[initial onset in December
2018](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/notes/2018-12-head-neck-jaw-tooth-pain.md)
during a period of high stress along with dental issues, and also that
it gradually improved, but my eyes still felt tired if I kept the
lights on for a long time at night, even after my stress issues were resolved.

They said that there was no medically identified problem with my eye
to explain it but it was common for people to have photosensitivity
without any medically identified cause; stress was identified as a
reason.

I wondered if I had just gotten used to darkness despite not having
the initial photosensitivity trigger, and asked if I should try to
"force" myself to keep the lights on at night in order to get used to
light. I mentioned that it's not an issue right now since I don't
share a room, but in the future if I did, then this could become a
challenge.

They said that medically speaking, there was no need to try to adjust
to brighter light. Blue-light-blocking glasses, dimmer lights, and
even hats (like the one I was wearing) were suggested as ideas to
negotiate roommate challenges that might arise in the future.

### Need for prescription glasses?

Given my small level of myopia, I asked if glasses were needed. Justin
said that glasses are not needed for this level of myopia -- I would
pass the vision component of the driving test. However, I could take
the prescription and get glasses if I wanted.

I also asked if the condition was expected to worsen over time. Justin
said that there was no specific expectation of worsening; in fact, it
could get better since people tend to get more far-sighted with age.

### Frequency of eye exams

The doctors recommended annual eye exams, with fundus photography
every few years.

### Transfer of records

The doctors said that they could transfer my records to another eye
doctor if needed.

### Post-dilation precautions

Justin said the dilation would take effect about 15 minutes after it
was put in my eyes. Once it took effect, I would have trouble reading
small fonts on screens for about two hours, and be sensitive to
sunlight for about 6-8 hours. When I told him I had not been able to
get my sunglasses, he gave me a UV protection strip (basically glasses
but without a frame) that I could use for my journey home.

## Other stuff

I chatted a bit with Justin while we were moving around, to learn more
about his world.

He said that he's in his third year and does up to four eye exams a
day, about two days a week. He started doing eye exams this summer,
after completing about two years of training. He goes and talks to the
attending doctor when he needs advice during the eye exam, but
otherwise does the exam himself.

I asked Justin if he had active supervision when he saw his first
client. He said no -- they do practice in the first two years on each
other. So he's had the procedure done to him many many times, and done
on it his colleagues many many times as well.

## Check-out

As part of the check-out process I paid the $20 extra for fundus
photography with my debit card.

## Eye recovery

### Return journey (2 PM to 2:30 PM)

For my return journey I used my UV strip, cap, and umbrella. The cap
and umbrella were effective at blocking the direct glare of the sun,
but the UV strip was very useful in blocking ambient brightness even
when I was looking away from the sun.

I took BART back from downtown Berkeley to North Berkeley in order to
reduce my sun exposure time (cutting it down from 25 minutes to about
10 minutes).

I got back home around 2:30 PM.

### Being able to work on screens again

While at the eye care center, I had trouble reading small screens,
including text messages on my phone. After I got back home, I
continued to have some trouble with the UV strip on, but things were
clearer with the strip removed. Since I was at home by this time and
not directly exposed to the sun, I removed the strip around 2:45 PM.
