# 2021-11-05 flu shot

On Friday, November 5, 2021, at around 7 PM, I got my 2021 influenza
vaccine from the Walgreens at Gilman Street, Berkeley.

## Booking

I originally went to the Walgreens at Gilman Street, Berkeley, on the
evening of October 15, 2021 in order to get my influenza
vaccine. However, at the location I discovered that vaccines were
provided by appointment only, and appointments could only be made
online and by phone. After going back home, I booked an appointment
for Friday October 22 at 7 PM. I wanted to do a Friday evening so as
to minimize the impact of side-effects on my day job and external
commitments (I had done something similar for my [second Pfizer COVID
dose](2021-06-25-pfizer-covid-vaccine-dose-2.md)).

As the next week was quite rainy, I was unsure if my appointment time
would be a time of significant rain, so I decided on Friday October 22
to defer my appointment. Since my [eye exam](2021-10-29-eye-exam.md)
was scheduled for Friday October 29, I decided to pick the next
Friday, November 5, for my flu shot appointment. I chose a time of 7
PM to be late enough to not interfere with work.

## Appointment

### Vaccine selection

I arrived at the location a few minutes before 7 PM and waited in line
for a few minutes, reaching the counter pretty much on time.

I checked with the pharmacist what vaccines were available, expressing
a preference for Flucelvax, a cell-based flu vaccine that I consider
close enough to vegan, compared to most of the other vaccines that are
egg-based. Unfortunately, Flucelvax was not available; there were two
vaccines available and I didn't have a preference among them so the
pharmacist selected Afluria.

### Injection

I filled in the consent form and then was invited in to the room for
injection. I told the pharmacist that I wanted the shot in my right
arm. She put the dose pretty quickly.
