# 2023-10-04 eye exam

Sections of this document:

* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)
* [Prior preparation and review on 2023-10-01](#prior-preparation-and-review-on-2023-10-01)
* [Examination](#examination)
* [Examination summary](#examination-summary)
* [Further discussion](#further-discussion)
* [Checkout process and electronic copy](#checkout-process-and-electronic-copy)
* [Return journey and subsequent recovery](#return-journey-and-subsequent-recovery)

NOTE: I have left out the names of the examiner and attending
physician, and have noted both in private notes.

## Appointment booking

On Friday 2023-09-15, I called in to the UC Berkeley Optometry Clinic
to schedule an appointment for an eye exam. The appointment was
scheduled for Wednesday 2023-10-04 at 1 PM at the Tang Eye Center,
with appointment duration being 90 minutes (1 PM to 2:30 PM).

I didn't ask about price explicitly, since the price last time of $114
was fairly reasonable, but after the call I realized this so I checked
online. I found [this
page](https://eyecare.berkeley.edu/plan-your-visit/fees-and-insurance/)
that suggests a current price of $129 for a comprehensive eye exam
(assuming that insurance does not apply), which is what I signed up
for.

Shortly after booking the appointment, I got an email notification
about it, confirming the details of my booking.

I also added the event to my calendar so as not to forget.

## Prior preparation and review on 2023-10-01

### Questions to bring up

* Fundus photos were taken last time to monitor for changes to the
  size ratio of the inner disk and outer disk, since this was
  different between the eyes.
* I'm seeing something in my right eye -- I don't recall this being
  there last time, but perhaps it was -- what is it?
* Photosensitivity is still approximately the same as last time -- any
  further insights on it?
  * It did go up a bit briefly during flashes of tooth pain, masking
    for extended periods of time, or keeping the light on for several
    hours at a time.
* Minor incidents since last meeting:
  * [2022-05-26 onward eye and skin
    irritation](2022-05-26-eye-and-skin-irritation.md): Starting
    2022-05-26, I experienced some eye and skin irritation likely
    triggered by the powder getting into the air when opening a new
    container. I got it under control by frequent eye washing, using
    sunglasses when handling laundry detergent, and keeping laundry
    detergent container in a tight plastic bag and in a closed shelf
    when not using.
  * [2022-06-21 hand sanitizer
    squirt](2022-06-21-hand-sanitizer-squirt.md): On 2022-06-21, I had
    a little bit of hand sanitizer squirt into my eye. I flushed my
    eyes for several minutes and recovered fully within a few hours. I
    made some protocol changes including reducing the height of the
    hand sanitizer (so that even if it squirted, it would not go all
    the way up to my eyes) and checking for and clearing nozzle
    blockages regularly to reduce the risk of unexpected squirts.

### Stuff to take with me for the appointment

The date of the appointment is expected to be sunny and hot, so it's
important to be well-prepared for the journey to and from the
appointment. The return journey will be trickier since my eyes will be
dilated from the appointment.

* Sunglasses: Wear as usual
* Cap: I verified I still have my cap accessible
* Umbrella: I have an umbrella that I can use for further protection
  against the sunlight

### Taking BART: undecided

Taking BART will reduce the duration I have to walk by a little bit,
but not a lot. My current thinking is to not take BART for the journey
*to* the appointment, but possibly to take BART for the return journey
when my eyes will be dilated and it'll be a little harder to walk all
the way back. I will decide based on how I feel after the appointment.

### Food plans

Unlike with a dental cleaning trip, I don't expect any risk factor for
the procedure from any particular kinds of diet, nor do I expect that
the procedure will affect my dietary needs. So I don't plan to do any
special food stocking. So, there is no specific food consumption
guidance for before or after the procedure.

#### Food purchase trips

I'm planning to do a food purchase trip on Sunday October 1 to get
enough groceries and produce to last me for at least 2 days after the
eye exam.

#### Food consumption guidance prior to procedure

My only guidance is related to timing. The goal is to finish the first
meal by 11:30 AM and the last meal by 8 PM each day. This will reduce
the degree of adjustment needed on the day of the procedure. However,
this is only a light guidance, and other constraints may take
precedence.

NOTE: I wasn't really able to adhere to this plan due to other
constraints and tasks I needed to do.

#### Meal prep prior to procedure

I plan to finish food preparation on Monday and Tuesday that is
expected to last me till at least two days after the procedure. The
goal is that I shouldn't need to do food prep immediately after the
procedure when my eyes won't be in great condition.

### Sleep plans

My plan is to sleep by 11:30 PM starting Saturday September 30. I also
hope to wake up organically around 8:30 AM with natural bowel movement
within 30-45 minutes of waking up. I will set an alarm for around 9:15
AM except on days where I have earlier appointments.

I was able to adhere to this plan on Saturday night / Sunday morning,
and slept nine hours, allowing me to catch up on a slight sleep
backlog.

NOTE: I wasn't able to do this on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday night
due to other higher-priority tasks.

### Exercise plans

My current plan is to take a break from all exercise on the day of the
eye exam. I might also take a break from exercise on one of the two
days prior to it (Monday or Tuesday) in order to be physically and
mentally relaxed and to have more time for other preparatory steps,
but if I have enough free time I'll probably do the exercise. The
reason for not enforcing an exercise break is that I've had breaks
from exercise for multiple reasons in the past few weeks, so I'm not
in a state of exhaustion/fatigue from exercise.

NOTE: I did take a break from exercise on Tuesday (the prior day) and
on Wednesday.

## Examination

I walked to the Tang Center at UC Berkeley, arriving shortly after
12:30 PM for my 1 PM appointment. Unlike last time, there was no
COVID-19 screening or other additional steps for building access, so I
was able to walk right into the optometry office. After that, I
checked in using the kiosk and waited in the waiting area of the
optometry office.

I was called in shortly after 1 PM by the examiner. I washed my hands
(this was optional, unlike last time, but I did it anyways) then sat
down for the examination.

### Initial questions

The examiner asked me if there were any updates related to my health
or eye health. I mentioned the minor incidents noted at the beginning
of this document. The fundus stuff and photosensitivity were already
in the examiner's notes. I also asked about the stuff in my right eye
to the left of my pupil, and she said she'll examine it as part of the
eye exam.

The examiner also asked me about my strabismus (lazy eye) that I had
apparently shared with the previous examiner as it was in my
history. I mentioned that I had self-treated with exercises and had
received feedback from others that it had improved.

### Eye charts

I was made to do several eye charts, first in the dark by manually
blocking my eye with a handheld blocking item, then in the light with
my face inserted to a machine. The letters were projected onto a
projector on the wall, like last time.

For near vision, I was asked to read a printed chart held in my hand.

After the initial round of reading, I was then asked to do comparisons
between different levels of correction, in order to identify which
versions were more or less blurry.

The examiner used this information to figure out my glasses
prescription. She then got a specific corrective lens and had me
confirm that that lens was better both compared to no lens and
compared to another (stronger) lens. That helped confirm the
prescription number she had deduced.

She asked me if I wanted to get the distance vision glasses based on
the prescription. I said I don't think I need glasses, but she wrote
the prescription anyway so that I could use it if and when I decided to
get glasses.

The examiner also did some other tests including checking for light
reflex and checking whether my eyes can move around to follow an
object.

### Looking into the eye before any dye application; diagnosis of ocular melanosis

The examiner then looked into my eyes using the microscope, and in
particular focused on what I had noticed to the left of the pupil in
my right eye. She reported that the stuff I reported was a harmless
case of ocular melanosis, where some pigment accumulates in the eye,
and it's common for people with darker skin. She mentioned that the
previous examiner had already noted this in my chart, so it's not a
recent problem.

### Application of dye for further examination

The examiner then applied the dye to do some further examination of
the eye.

### Dilation and waiting time

The examiner then applied the dilation fluid.

While waiting for the dilation fluid to be absorbed, she took my blood
pressure. My reading came to 108/77.

### Peripheral vision check

The examiner then did the peripheral vision check manually; rather
than last time, when an automated static perimetry test (with a
special machine located in another room) the examiner just did a
manual test where I was asked to look at a specific point and then
detect using my peripheral vision whether she had one or four fingers
open.

Unlike last time, when the peripheral vision check had been done
*before* the dilation, this time it was done after the dilation (and I
had asked the examiner about this and she had said that it's fine to
do the dilation first). This was probably an overall more efficient
use of time, and helped conclude my exam faster.

### Detailed eye examination

Now that enough time had passed since the dilation fluid had been
applied, the examiner did a detailed eye exam.

I believe that the eye pressure test was done at this stage, though I might be mistaken and it might have been done prior to dilation.

This test involved a blue object getting really close to the
eye. Since I tended to close my eye when the blue object got really
close, the examiner manually held my eyes open to conduct the test.

Apart from the eye pressure test, there was detailed eye examination,
with me being asked to look in different directions while the examiner
looked at my eyes from different angles.

### Fundus photos

I was then taken to the other room with the fundus photography
machine. The fundus photos cost an extra $20 on top of the eye exam
cost of $129; the $20 was the same as last time.

### Sanity checks by attending physician

The attending physician did some sanity checks at the end by doing a
quick eye exam, and in particular focusing on the fundus stuff in his
discussion with the examiner.

## Examination summary

### Acronym key

Acronym | Expansion | Meaning
-- | -- | --
OD | oculus dextrus | right eye
OS | oculus sinister | left eye
OU | oculus uterque | both eyes
GEE | general eye exam | general eye exam
RTC | return to clinic | this is basically specifying when I should have my next eye exam
PRN | pro re nata | as needed

### Complaint / POV

Purpose of visit: GEE / distance blur

### Diagnosis

1. H52.11 MYOPIA, OD
2. H52.223 ASTIGMATISM, REGULAR, OU

### Assessment

1. Myopia OU, Astigmatism regular OS
2. Asymmetric ONH OD>OS
  - C/D: OD: 0.5/0.55, OS: 0.40/0.45
  - stable

(Note: item 2 above is referring to the asymmetry between my left and
right eye for which the fundus photography was taken).

### Plan

1. Released updated distance Rx for general use.
2. Fundus photo taken, monitor yearly.

RTC 1 year for GEE or sooner

### Refraction

Label | Sphere | Cylinder | Axis | VA
-- | -- | -- | -- | --
OD | -0.75 | -0.75 | 105 | 20/25-2
OS | 0.00 | -1.00 | 17 |

### Slit lamp exam results

Field | Value for OD (right eye) | Value for OS (left eye)
-- | -- | --
Adnexa/Lids | Clear | Clear
Bulbar Conjunctiva | Conjunctival nevus 2:00, 5:00 | Pinpoint nevus 5:00 at the limbus
Palpebral Conjunctiva | Clear | Clear
Sclera | White | White
Cornea | clear, Tr Inf punctate staining, PEE | clear, Inf & central punctate staining PEE
Van Herick | 4-blank | blank-4
Ant Chamber | Unrem | Unrem
Iris | Flat | Flat
Iris Color | Brown | Brown
Lens | Unrem | Unrem

### Dilation results

Field | Value for OD (right eye) | Value for OS (left eye)
-- | -- | --
Optic Disk | Round, deep to lamina | Round, moderate depth
Appearance | Pink & healthy with distinct margins | Pink & healthy with distinct margins
Size / Ratio | Normal, H 0.5 V 0.55 | Normal, H 0.4 V 0.45
Nerve Fiber Layer | intact 360 | intact 360
Macula | Flat & even | Flat & Even
Posterior Pole | Unremarkable | Unremarkable
Vessels | Normal course and caliber | Normal course and caliber
Periphery | no breaks 360, unremarkable | no breaks 360, unremarkable
Vitreous | Clear | Clear

## Further discussion

### Near vision is good

My near vision continues to be good. Near vision is expected to
deteriorate over time, but so far it's holding up.

### Distance vision has a small prescription number, so I could get glasses but don't strictly need them

My distance vision has a small prescription number, so I could get
glasses, but the number isn't so large as to absolutely need them, so
it's up to me.

Distance vision has no clear trends with age; it might get better or
worse over time. So they'll continue to monitor it in eye exams.

### Stability despite asymmetry (cf. fundus)

Based on the fundus photos, compared with the findings from last time,
the verdict was that despite the asymmetry between my eyes, things
were stable for both eyes, so there doesn't appear to be a problem so
far. But they can continue taking photos in future years for continued
monitoring.

## Checkout process and electronic copy

At the end of the eye exam, I paid $149, including the $129 eye exam
fee and the $20 fee for fundus photography. I also requested that the
examination details and fundus photos be emailed to me so that I have
an electronic copy.I stayed at the location till I received the
email. In the email, I noticed that I had received the fundus photo
for only one eye, so I asked them about the other eye and then got
that photo (that photo had been a bit lagged in being uploaded to the
system).

In total, I got:

* 4-page PDF whose first page was the examination summary (transcribed
  in the [examination summary section above](#examination-summary)),
  second page was an eye photo, the third page were slit lamp exam and
  dilation results, and fourth page was the prescription (a subset of
  the information in the "Refraction" section of the examination
  summary)

* 1-page PDF with fundus photo of left eye

* 1-page PDF with fundus photo of right eye

Fun fact: the name of the attending physician was correct in the paper
copy I received, but incorrect in the electronic copy. Other than
that, everything matched up.

## Return journey and subsequent recovery

### Return journey

For my return journey, I walked back. I used sunglasses, cap, and
umbrella to protect myself from the sunlight after the increased
sensitivity of my eyes due to the dilation. The combination seemed to
work well at not hurting my eyes.

### Use of computer after returning

When I started using my computer after returning, I noticed that the
text appeared blurry. I had to magnify back to 100% (I often use
magnifications in the 50%-80% range in orer to see more text on the
screen). The blurriness gradually reduced but was still not gone fully
as of around 5:30 PM.
