# 2023-10-13 flu shot

Sections of this document:

* [Appointment booking](#appointment-booking)
* [Appointment](#appointment)
* [Symptoms after appointment](#symptoms-after-appointment)

## Appointment booking

I booked my appointment for the flu shot on the afternoon of Friday
September 15. The appointment is for Friday October 13 at 3 PM at the
2801 Adeline Street location.

Some thoughts regarding the choice of date/time:

* Date/time: I wanted to pick a date/time where I'm not usually
  working, and where the next few days would also be light in terms of
  work and other external obligations. Friday 3 PM seems to be a good
  fit for these constraints.

* Time period: I wanted to get the flu shot out of the way, so that it
  does not interfere or conflict with other health-related things that
  I might want to time more precisely (for instance, I want to time my
  COVID-19 vaccine to abour 30-45 days prior to any travel I might
  undertake). However, I also wanted to make sure it's sufficiently
  late that my immunity is expected to last till the end of the flu
  season. Mid-October seems like the right time period for this
  tradeoff, so I picked the latest available date for which I could
  book an appointment.

After booking the appointment, I got a confirmation message. The
confirmation message says that I should report to the pharmacy 15
minutes prior to the appointment and that I should carry my insurance
card with me.

I also finished filling the consent form and other questions on the
website, so in principle I shouldn't need to fill them in on-site,
though judging from experience with past flu shots, I'll probably have
to fill the information again on-site.

On 2023-09-16 (one day after booking), I noticed that I had not
blocked the event on my calendar, so I added it to my calendar.

## Appointment

### Preparation before the vaccine dose

I arrived at the location (2801 Adeline Street) and got in the line
for the pharmacy counter about two minutes before my target arrival
time of 2:45 PM. The line was long and moved slowly, which seems to
partially be due to their computer systems being slow. I got to the
front of the line at around 3:15 PM, but due to their systems being
slow, had to wait till around 3:30 PM for my online filled forms to
become available and for them to give me a printout of the shot
details. The vaccine itself was covered by insurance, so I didn't have
to pay out of pocket.

I then stood outside the health room till about 3:50 PM, at which
point I was called in for my vaccine to be administered. Since I had
been standing for a long time with my mask on and with my bagpack on,
and also experiencing the store's bright lights without sunglasses, I
was feeling a little stiff, so I massaged my right area of the neck so
as to be relaxed in that area ahead of the vaccine.

### Selection of vaccine

The vaccine that was selected for me was Flucelvax and the quantity
was 0.5 ml. I like this because Flucelvax is a [cell-based
vaccine](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/cell-based.htm), which means
less animal suffering (as it doesn't use hen's eggs, but mammalian
cell cultures) as well as possibly greater protection due to the use
of mammalian cell cultures.

### Administration of vaccine

I was called into the health room (where vaccines are administered) at
3:50 PM.

The administration was quick; I got the shot in my right arm. I first
removed my mask and sweatshirt (and then forgot to put my mask back
on). I held up my shirt sleeve with my left hand and relaxed my right
hand. The pharmacist gave me the vaccine dose and then applied a
bandage on the area. She asked me to stay in the store for about 15
minutes and to make sure to move my arm and confirm that it has its
full range of motion.

I was out of the health room around 3:53 PM.

### Observation period

I stayed in the store from 3:53 PM till about 4:08 PM, following the
15-minute observation period recommended by the pharmacist. I did not
observe any unusual symptoms over that time period.

## Symptoms after appointment

I had another errand to run after the appointment, so I finished that
and returned home around 5:30 PM. I did not experience any noteworthy
pain in my right arm until I got back home.

After 6 PM, I had occasional, transient experiences of pain and
stiffness in my right arm, but these did not last more than a few
seconds each time.

Also, some time around 6 PM, I tried using the hand gripper to see if
using the hand gripper with my right hand caused more noticeable pain,
and if my hand gripper strength was reduced. I found that the answers
were respectively yes and no: there was a clear pain for a few seconds
after using the hand gripper, but my hand gripper strength had not
noticeably reduced.

I went to sleep around 11 PM. By the time I went to sleep, I was quite
fatigued, but it's not clear how much was due to the flu shot and how
much was due to the extended trip including standing for about an hour
to wait for my flu shot.

I had a relaxing sleep, and got up the next day (2023-10-14) around
8:15 AM feeling refreshed. While sleeping, I was able to sleep on my
right side as needed even though there was a little bit of soreness.

I went jogging as usual on 2023-10-14 around 10 AM.

As I am out of the window when symptoms usually appear, I'm stopping
the recording of further updates as of 2023-10-14 around 11 AM.

### Additional miscellaneous notes regarding exercise

I did strength exercises on 2023-10-13 a few hours prior to getting
the flu shot. Per my normal schedule, the next round of strength
exercises would have been on 2023-10-15. However, I decided to skip
strength exercises on 2023-10-15 due to slight soreness in the
area. The soreness did not get in the way of regular business, but
could be aggravated by strength exercises.

I did, however, resume hand gripper exercises as usual on 2023-10-14,
and saw either no deterioration or a slight deterioration in
performance, and only a slight increase in arm/shoulder fatigue
relative to usual.

### Note about heart rate measurement

On the evening of Sunday 2023-10-15, after finishing meal prep for
dinner, eating dinner, cleanup, and unpacking laundry, I felt that my
heart rate was a little higher than usual. So I measured it using the
pulse oximeter. I got a range of 64 to 72 bpm. This is higher than my
usual of 55 to 65 bpm, but I do have somewhat higher heart rate in the
evenings, so it's not too unusual.

### Bandage removal

I removed my flu shot bandage on Sunday 2023-10-15 around 11 PM,
shortly before sleeping.
