# Health learning strategy

Document written: November 26, 2024

Document last updated: May 29, 2025

This document provides the broad contours of the strategy I am using
to learn about my health. The majority of this health learning is
multiplexed with eating, meal prep, or cleaning, so that it does not
directly eat into time for other things. Nonetheless, I do expect that
the cognitive effort of learning this stuff may be using up my
cognitive energy, so I am careful to follow [best practices around
exertion and
stimulation](../best-practices/best-practices-around-exertion-and-stimulation.md)
-- roughly limiting this to 2 hours per day and to 45 minutes per day
when away from computer.

My health learning strategy has the following aspects:

* [Medical school curriculum
  education](#medical-school-curriculum-education): I'm primarily
  doing this during eating and meal prep while in front of my
  computer. I'm mainly using Ninja Nerd for this, and am hoping to
  finish a first pass by the end of 2026 and a second pass plus review
  by the end of 2029.

* [Longevity and personal health optimization space
  education](#longevity-and-personal-health-optimization-space-education):
  I'm primarily doing this during eating, meal prep, and post-meal
  cleaning. I'm mainly using Peter Attia and Andrew Huberman for this,
  and expect to be on top of most of the parts that are interesting to
  me by the end of 2025.

* [Stories of patients, doctors, nurses, and
  caregivers](#stories-of-patients-doctors-nurses-and-caregivers): I'm
  primarily doing this during eating, meal prep, and post-meal
  cleaning. Consumption sources are variable and there is no specific
  expected trajectory.

* [Deep dives into specific areas](#deep-dives-into-specific-areas): I
  do this as needed for a topic. Unlike the other categories, here I
  may do more work beyond just watching videos during eating or meal
  prep. Consumption sources are topic-dependent. My hope is to get
  faster over time with deep dives, as my background knowledge
  improves.

## Medical school curriculum education

### Reason for doing this

There are two main angles to medical school curriculum education.

#### Understanding the anatomy and physiology of humans in a normal, healthy state

Medical school curriculum education helps provide the building blocks
of knowledge for the anatomy and physiology of humans in a normal,
healthy state. For instance, concepts like how the heart works
normally, how the kidneys work normally, how breathing and respiration
happen, etc.

This is a key foundation on top of which I can make more informed
decisions regarding my health (such as exercise regimens) as well as
useful background information for the rest of my medical
education. That's because the rest of the medical education, such as
Peter Attia, often don't go into enough detail on the background
material, but rather start from the viewpoint of somebody with a
medical school curriculum education and then provide a "diff" of
incremental knowledge that might be missed. So, having that baseline
allows me to apply the diff from any such source better.

#### Understanding various kinds of pathology and the processes the medical establishment uses

This is less relevant to me in the near term, but it is helpful
particularly when I have concerning symptoms (or when a friend or
family member has them and is interested in my input). By knowing
better the potential causes as well as how the medical establishment
is likely to proceed with diagnosis, I can make a more informed
decision regarding how to handle the situation and whether to seek
medical attention.

### Consumption context

I consume this content generally as video content when eating or
preparing meals (when cutting vegetables for meal prep). Video content
is easy to consume even when my hands are busy, as long as I am close
to my computer. It therefore does not displace time I would otherwise
be able to use for more productive purposes.

However, I cannot consume this content purely as audio, so I cannot
consume it while away from my computer (for instance, when washing
dishes or doing house cleaning). Therefore, I give it higher priority
for consumption when I am at my computer.

### Consumption sources: mainly Ninja Nerd, sometimes Dr. Matt and Dr. Mike

My go-to source here is [Ninja
Nerd](https://www.youtube.com/@NinjaNerdOfficial). In cases where
Ninja Nerd does not (yet) cover content but I want to learn it soon, I
use other sources such as [Dr. Matt and
Dr. Mike](https://www.youtube.com/@DrMattDrMike), [Dr. Najeeb
Lectures](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPHpx55tgrbm8FrYYCflAHw),
and [Medicosis
Perfectionalis](https://www.youtube.com/@MedicosisPerfectionalis)

Within Ninja Nerd, I consume the content as playlists. At any given
time, I might be going through 3 to 5 different playlists that I can
switch between based on my mood, and within a playlist I generally
proceed linearly. I might sometimes go back and rewatch earlier
content in a playlist if I discover I haven't retained enough of it to
make sense of later content.

I record the specific playlists and the amount of time from them,
generally rounded down to a multiple of 5 minutes, in my daily update
issue.

### Review strategy

I often do a mental recall of recently watched Ninja Nerd video
content while washing dishes, exercising, or otherwise away from
computer. When watching new content, I often try to mentally answer
the questions posed to the viewers that the viewer should be able to
answer based on older content. In some cases, I may even pause the
video to try to recall older content better so that I can get more
value from watching the new content.

I also sometimes do followup Googling, reading of Wikipedia articles,
or online quizzes to test my knowledge occasionally.

### Expected trajectory

I started following this strategy in early 2024, and have refined it
over time.

At the current rate of watching, I expect that I will be done with one
pass of watching the bulk of the relevant content by the end of
2026.

I'm not yet decided on whether after this first pass I should rewatch
the same Ninja Nerd videos, or try to consume the equivalent content
from another educator. Some of the candidates I have for this other
educator are:

* [Dr. Matt and Dr. Mike](https://www.youtube.com/@DrMattDrMike):
  These videos tend to be much shorter than Ninja Nerd (for the same
  topic covered), and they do a reasonable job of hitting the key
  points, but without going into too much detail. They could help as a
  quick review.

* [THE WHITE ARMY](https://www.youtube.com/@THEWHITEARMY): These are
  much more medical student-targeted stuff, combining textbook
  knowledge with real-world knowledge. I've watched a few of their
  videos since then and might watch more once I finish the first pass
  of Ninja Nerd.

* [Dr. Najeeb
  Lectures](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPHpx55tgrbm8FrYYCflAHw):
  These videos are comparable in length to Ninja Nerd. They go a
  little less into specific details and cover a bit more of the
  medical intuitions.

* [Medicosis
  Perfectionalis](https://www.youtube.com/@MedicosisPerfectionalis):
  The videos have an irreverent style and do a great job communicating
  etymological nuance and medical intuition, but may be a bit harder
  to follow than Ninja Nerd when it comes to a more classroom-style
  understanding. They could be interesting as a complement/followup to
  Ninja Nerd.

I expect that I will be done with about two passes of watching
plus review, and be fairly on top of the material by the end of 2029.

If my rate of watching reduces somewhat, due to changed priorities,
the timeline may correspondingly extend somewhat.

## Longevity and personal health optimization space education

### Reason for doing this

The main things this space covers, that are not covered in medical
school curriculum education, is insights into how to use medical
information to improve my personal health and prevent pathology, as
opposed to how to handle pathology once it occurs. In particular, the
information I get here is helpful in these ways:

* It provides more context on evaulating vitals in physiologic
  ranges. For instance, how should we think of heart rate, blood
  pressure, breathing rate, etc. in terms of optimal health? How
  should we think of blood biomarkers?

* It provides more context on best practices for diet, exercise,
  sleep, and other lifestyle choices.

With that said, the foundation of understanding normal healthy anatomy
and physiology from a medical school curriculum education is important
to be able to make good use of this information.

### Consumption context

I generally listen to this content in video form either while on my
computer or when stepped away from the computer. For the most part, it
does not require watching the screen, though sometimes I need to peek
at the screen briefly when a diagram or image is being shared.

### Consumption sources: mainly Peter Attia and Andrew Huberman (for now)

For now, my two main consumption sources are Peter Attia (primarily
his free Drive podcast episodes that run between 1 and 5 hours, with
most episodes around 1.5 to 3.5 hours). I also occasionally listen to
Andrew Huberman, both his solo presentations and his interviews with
others.

### Review strategy

Generally, I don't review the content as its density is way less than
Ninja Nerd and I am not trying to attain mastery. In some particular
cases, the content here has an overlap with a deep dive purpose (see
later section) in which case I may do followup reading and review of
related material.

### Expected trajectory

I expect that by the end of 2025, I would be mostly caught up with the
portions of the archives of Peter Attia's Drive podcast and Andrew
Huberman's stuff that I consider relevant, after which I'll mostly
just be following along by watching relevant new content as it comes
out.

## Stories of patients, doctors, nurses, and caregivers

### Reason for doing this

This is mostly to get a different angle into how various medical
conditions and treatment protocols actually work. It helps provide
color and a concrete perspective (an actual person experiencing
symptoms, or a person actually using some equipment) that may be
missing from Ninja Nerd or Peter Attia, where the topics are discussed
more abstractly.

### Consumption context

I generally listen to this content in video form either while on my
computer or when stepped away from the computer. Some of these need me
to look at the screen because visual information is being shared, and
others don't.

### Consumption sources: variable

Here are a few examples.

Doctor side:

* [ViolinMD](https://www.youtube.com/@ViolinMD)
* [MaxFeinsteinMD](https://www.youtube.com/@MaxFeinsteinMD)

Patient side:

* [coachninab](https://www.youtube.com/@coachninab) (Crohn's disease)
* [Jenni (POTS)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZoRsJvlKAfQ)

Some of these fit into a goal of topic-specific deep dives, while
others are more one-off. For instance, with Crohn's, I did not have
the goal of deep diving into Crohn's as a medical condition, but still
wanted to get some perspective on what it's like.

### Review strategy

I don't have a formal review strategy. However, I do sometimes revisit
and rewatch a video I previously watched after I feel like my overall
medical knowledge has improved enough that I expect to get more value
out of the content.

### Expected trajectory

I expect to keep consuming this kind of content over time, as more of
it becomes available and as my interest moves around to different
conditions. Unlike the previous two categories, I don't have any
expectation of getting to a milestone by a specific year in the near
future.

## Deep dives into specific areas

NOTE: The videos here include videos in the preceding categories, as
well as a bunch of other videos, often by topic specialists, that go
into topic-specific stuff in more detail.

### Reason for doing this

In some cases, I might do deep dives into specific areas. This is
usually motivated by the area being relevant to me, in one of these
ways:

* It's directly relevant to a health problem I am facing or suspect I
  am facing.

* It's relevant to a health problem I expect to be at high risk of
  over the longer run, and where I can take preventative action now.

* It's something affecting a friend or family member whom I might be
  able to advise better if I am more informed on the topic.

### Consumption context

I generally listen to this content in video form either while on my
computer or when stepped away from the computer. Some of these need me
to look at the screen because visual information is being shared, and
others don't.

### Consumption sources: topic-dependent

Generally, for any given topic, there are a few consumption sources
that are good for them. Some examples:

* When investigating SIBO and related conditions, I dove deep into
  [SIBO SOS](https://www.youtube.com/c/SIBOSOS), watched a bunch of
  videos interviewing Mark Pimentel, and listened to a bunch of
  patient stories on YouTube.

* When investigating hair loss, in addition to Andrew Huberman's
  [two-hour video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ZrlsVx85ek) and
  Peter Attia's [Drive podcast interview of Alan
  Bauman](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M5B8tNCXEy4), I found a
  number of YouTube videos and then dug into some of the corresponding
  channels.

* When dealing with anal swelling issues, I watched a bunch of videos
  from [Your Friendly
  Proctologist](https://www.youtube.com/@yourfriendlyproctologist).

### Review strategy

For these deep dives, I will often do more reading of scientific
articles, Wikipedia pages, health websites, etc., and even do
technical calculations to make sure I understand the topic better. In
some cases, particularly where it is an issue affecting family and
friends, I may even discuss with the affected people or others. If I
have important insights, I might also write them up publicly.

### Expected trajectory

I don't have any expected trajectory for these as different topics can
come up at different times. However, my hope is that as I do more of
the first two categories (medical school curriculum education and
personal health optimization space education), the speed with which I
can get deep into a topic will improve, so that I can more quickly do
an accurate deep dive and cover more nuances.
