# 2022-11-26 flu shot

## Appointment booking

I booked my appointment for the flu shot at night on Sunday November
13.

## Flu shot (Saturday November 26)

My appointment was for 3 PM. I left my home around 2:30 PM and arrived
at the pharmacy counter at 2:45 PM, as recommended (the email
confirming the appointment suggested arriving 15 minutes prior to the
appointment time). The selected vaccine for me for Flucelvax, a
cell-based quadrivalent flu vaccine.

I filled in the paperwork and then waited outside
till about 3:05 PM, when I was invited into the pharmacy room. I elected to have the shot in my right arm.

The pharmacist asked me to take off my sweatshirt. I did so, then I
rolled up my sleeve. The pharmacist asked me to hold the rolled-up
sleeve since it didn't look very stable. I don't recall this being
part of the procedure for preious flu shots or COVID shots, but it's
possible that (a) the pharmacists were previously okay holding,
blocking, or pushing back the sleeve, or (b) different shirts have
different propensities for being rolled up and the one I was wearing
today is just a bit less prone to rolling up well, and/or the way I
had rolled it up wasn't very stable, or (c) this *was* part of
procedure previously as well; I just don't remember it well. Looking
at some [photos of vaccine
administration](https://theconversation.com/why-do-we-get-shots-in-the-arm-its-all-about-the-muscle-161259)
it looks like pharmacists have different styles; some ask the patient
to hold the shirt while others block the shirt with their
non-injecting hand.

The administration of the flu shot was a little more painful than I
would accept. The pharmacist said that she erred a little bit when
applying the shot and that's why it was more painful than expected.

I exited the room shortly before 3:10 PM. I sat for about five minutes
and then proceeded to do some shopping at Walgreens.
